AD-A253  671 


!!pii 

'lit! 


TIC 

ELECTE 
JUL2  4  1992  | 


NWC  TP  7207 


Computational  Fluid  Dynamics 
Capability  for  internally  Carried 
Store  Separation 


by 

7"  Sukumar  R.  Chakravarthy 
Kuo-Yen  Szema 

Computational  Fluid  Dynamics  Department 
Rockwell  International  Science  Center 

tor 

Attack  Weapons  Department 


DECEMBER  1S91 


uujiUuas 

mi  MIC  roproduoY. 
^  •  !  ,t>;i  ip  biaofe  am & 


NAVAL  WEAPONS  CENTER 
CHINA  LAKE,  CA  93555-6001 


Approved  tor  public  release; 
distribution  is  unlimited 


93.  *f  5L3  Ofefe 


92-19926 


avaS  Weapons  Center 


FOREWORD 

This  report  documents  a  program  having  as  its  objective  the  conduct  of  an  algorithm  research  and 
development  effort  that  would  result  in  the  demonstrated  capability  to  provide  accurate  numerical  flowfield 
data  for  situations  typical  of  weapon  carriage  and  release  from  an  internal  weapon  bay.  This  research  was 
sponsored  by  the  Naval  Weapons  Center  (NWC),  China  Lake,  Calif. 

This  work  was  performed  by  Rockwell  International  Science  Center  (RISC)  under  Contract  No. 
N60530-90-C-0393  during  the  period  from  26  September  1990  to  26  September  1991.  Technical  direction 
was  provided  by  Dr.  Robert  Burman  of  the  Naval  Weapons  Center.  Funding  for  this  effort  was  provided  by 
die  airframes  technology  portion  of  the  Air  Launched  Weaponry  Technology  Block  Program  at  the  Naval 
Weapons  Center  under  the  sponsorship  of  the  AAW/SSUW/SAT  Division  of  the  Office  of  Naval 
Technology  (OCNR-213). 

The  principal  investigators  at  RISC  were  Sukumar  R.  Chakravarthy  and  Kuo-Yen  Szema.  Other 
personnel  of  the  RISC  Computational  Fluid  Dynamics  Department  supported  the  effort 

In  die  interest  of  cost  savings,  the  document  prepared  by  RISC  was  used  without  change  for  this 
NWC  technical  publication.  Consequently,  there  are  deviations  from  standard  NWC  style  and  format 

The  report  was  reviewed  for  technical  accuracy  at  NWC  by  Dr.  Burman.  It  is  released  for  information 
only.  The  views  and  conclusions  are  those  of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  interpreted  as  representing  the 
official  policies,  either  expressed  or  implied,  of  the  Naval  Weapons  Center. 

Approved  by  Under  authority  of 

P.  B.  HOMER,  Head  *  D.  W.  COOK 

Attack  Weapons  Department  Capt.,  U.S.  Navy 

1  December  1991  -  Commander 

Released  for  publication  by 
W.  B.  PORTER 
Technical  Director 


NWC  Technical  Publication  7207 

Published  by . Technical  Information  Department 

Collation . Cover,  92  leaves 

First  priming . . . . . . . 170  copies 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


Form  Approved 
OMB  NO.  0704-0188 


■  mdmn dm  dmrdm.  to  Wn 


•Mi—  m  aay  mkat  Mjmci  at  tku  ••Uwn—  at  nfoua. 
i para,  1213  hfl—  Dane  Hiffcvcy,  Sails  1204,  iil«|W,  VA 


.  Pnjan  (704-01 il).  WMternffM.  DC  20303. 


D«otmbw  1991 


■  *1  *T'i  liT.M'j  d-Td.l 


Final;  9/26/90  to  92991 


COMPUTATIONAL  FLUID  DYNAMICS  CAPABILITY  FOR  INTERNALLY  CARRIED  STORE 
SEPARATION 


PfA»ir.K;M 


Contract  N60530-90-C-C383 


Chakravarthy,  Sukumar  R.,  and  Szama,  Kuo-Yan 


Rockwall  Intamatlonal  Science  Cantar 
Thouaand  Oaks,  CA  91398 


i :  vr, » v :  1 1  w  *n : « w  * :  wi :  r  v  i  :*mw  i  j  i  •  t  i  :  i  * 


Naval  Waapona  Cantar 
China  Laka,  CA  9JS55-8001 


A  Statement:  Approved  tor  public  ralaaaa;  distribution  la 


if  tji  :  n;Mti i  ■.niQTCT- .;,rrmi 


(U)  The  ability  to  predict  safe  and  effective  release  of  air-launched  weapons  carried  internally  in  a  weapon  bay  or  externally  on  a 
pylon/rack  is  required  by  the  Safety  Committee  before  approval  is  given  for  a  flight  test  to  validate  various  store  separation  characteristics. 
Because  of  the  novel  conditions  attendant  to  test  and  evaluation  (TAE)  testing,  only  limited  experimental  and  flight  data  are  available  beforehand  to 
aid  in  assessing  safe  weapon  release.  Computational  methods  have  the  potential  of  resolving,  in  a  timely  manner,  the  store  separation  problem 
without  these  weaknesses.  Two  areas  need  to  be  addressed.  First,  an  accurate  computational  algorithm  is  needed  to  minimi »  numerical 
uncertainty  as  the  store  is  tracked  in  time.  Second,  correct  physical  models  must  be  implemented  to  model  the  moving  store,  including  grid 
adaptation.  The  general  objective  of  this  program  is  to  conduct  an  algorithm  research  and  development  effort  that  will  result  in  demonstrating  the 
capability  to  provide  accurate  numerical  uowfield  predictions  for  situation  of  weapon  carriage  and  release  from  an  internal  weapons  bay.  Based 
on  a  truly  multidimensional  unrestricted  Essentially  Non -os  dilatory  (ENO)  scheme,  a  new  UNIVERSE  (Unification  of  essentially  Nan-oscillatory 
Interpolation  techniques  with  a  geometrically  VERSatilE)  series  code  has  been  developed  at  the  Rockwell  International  Science  Center.  The  new 
ENO  concept!  are  state-of-the-art  interpolation  schemes  that  work  with  arbitrary  cell  shapes.  For  example,  hexahedtal,  triangular  prism,  and 
tetrahedral  element!  (conservation  cells)  can  all  be  covered  in  a  unified  manner.  This  also  implies  that  both  structured  and  unstructured 
bookkeeping  schemes  can  be  employed  to  conveniently  treat  cotnplei  topologies.  A  new  suite  of  rally  automatic  flexible-cell  mesh  generation 
methods  is  also  being  developed  for  integration  with  the  new  series 

(U)  This  is  the  final  report  draft  for  Ruse  I  (contract  awarded  in  September  1990  by  the  Naval  Weapons  Center  to  Rockwell  International 
Science  Cotter) .  The  report  is  organized  into  two  major  sections:  Section  I  is  a  synopsii  of  Phase  I  work,  and  Section  II  contains  all  the  technical 
details.  Numerical  results  are  presented  for  the  linear  wave  equation.  Burgers'  equation,  two-dimensional  ’aircraft'*  and  ’store,"  F-18 
configuration.  Space  Shuttle  mulubody  configuration,  and  other  cases.  Solutions  are  in  very  good  agreement  with  available  exact  solutions  and 
experimental  data. 


it*  ’ll  "ILiAlt:! 


IKK  LILLI :  1 J.l'] 


Fluid  Dynamics 
Unstructured  Grid 


Computational  Fluid  Dynamics 
G  soma  try  Formulation 


Riemarm  Problem 


UNCLASSIFIED 


NSN  75-01-280-5500 


Of  THIS  PAGE 

UNCLASSIFIED 


Of  ABSTRACT 

UNCLASSIFIED 


Standard  Form  288  (R»v.  2*89) 

Prescribed  by  ANSI  Std.  239-18 

298-102 


UNCLASSIFIED 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAGE  (Whan  Data  Entarad 


Standard  Form  298  Back  (Rav.  2*89) 


NWC  TP  7207 


CONTENTS 


SECTION  I— SYNOPSIS . 3 

I. 0  Introduction . .4 

2.0  Summary . .6 

3.0  Conclusions . 8 

SECTION  H— TECHNICAL  DISCUSSION . 13 

4.0  Numerical  Framework  for  Universe-Series  Codes . 14 

5.0  Constitutive  Equations . 33 

6.0  Riemann  Solvers . 39 

7.0  Geometry  Formulation  Details . 78 

8.0  Topology  Treatment . 98 

9.0  Grid  Generation  Methodology . 104 

10.0  Store  Tracking  and  Grid  Adaptation . 133 

II. 0  Boundary  Condition  ftocedures . 137 

12.0  Software  Architectural  Issues . 139 

13.0  Discussion  of  Options  and  Features . 152 

14.0  Illustrative  Examples . 158 

15.0  References . 179 


Accesion  For 

l 

NTIS 

CRA&I 

u 

DTIC 

TAB 

ri 

U..ai  :':iOln:Ccd 

J.ibtilicaiion 

1 

. 4 

By 

1 

i 

.  . . i 

Dl.-t  ib> 

.  tion  / 

1 

A 

/  c  i 

Ava  i  . 

-:/o-  j 

Dist 

OIK 

I 

A  i 

< 

i 

— i 

NWC  TP  7207 


SECTION  I 
SYNOPSIS 


3 


NWC  TP  7207 


1.0  INTRODUCTION 


The  design  of  modern  aerospace  vehicle  concepts  increasingly  requires  the  de¬ 
tailed  understanding  and  synergistic  use  of  ever  more  complex  fluid  phenomena.  Both 
industry  and  government  view  Computational  Fluid  Dynamics  (CFD)  as  a  critical, 
potentially  efficient  and  cost-effective  technology  for  the  development  of  advanced 
aerospace  configurations.  The  overall  technical  problem  in  CFD  is  to  devise  reliable 
numerical  approaches  to  simulate  the  complex  fluid  physics  arising  in  flow  about  com¬ 
plex  shapes/topologies.  Any  approach  to  the  solution  of  this  problem  must  address 
the  following  issues:  (a)  appropriate  modeling  of  the  physics,  (b)  proper  match  be¬ 
tween  physics  and  numerics,  (c)  accuracy,  (d)  geometric  flexibility,  and  (e)  ease  of 
use.  In  today’s  environment,  these  issues  must  also  be  treated  in  ways  which  are 
compatible  and  synergistic  with  both  proven  and  emerging  high-performance  com¬ 
puter  architectures.  The  major  thrust  of  the  Science  Center’s  CFD  program  is  to 
effect  rapid  but  sustained  strides  in  algorithm  and  code  development  to  exploit  the 
increasing  power  of  supercomputers,  super-minicomputers,  parallel  computers,  and 
graphics  workstations  in  order  to  systematically  and  continually  improve  the  use  of 
CFD  in  state-of-the-art  design  and  analysis  scenarios. 

In  FY  90,  we  embarked  on  an  ambitious  plan  to  begin  the  development  of  the 
next  generation  of  CFD  codes  and  technology  —  the  successors  to  the  proven  and 
successful  USA-series  (Unified  Solution  Algorithms)  of  codes  that  are  currently  in 
widespread  use  in  Rockwell  and  in  Government  agencies.  The  new  generation  is 
based  on  very  significant  developments  in  computational  algorithms  accomplished  in 
past  and  present  research  and  will  also  benefit  from  the  considerable  experience  the 
CFD  Department’s  researchers  have  acquired  in  working  with  more  than  one  hundred 
users  throughout  Rockwell  and  in  other  DoD  agencies. 

In  this  endeavor,  we  looked  forward  to  participate  in  Government-sponsored  re¬ 
search  programs  which  are  particularly  well  matched  with  our  quest  for  the  next 
higher  plateau  in  CFD  capability.  The  current  contract  (awarded  September,  1990 
by  NWC  to  Rockwell  International  Science  Center)  fits  that  category  extremely  well. 
The  general  objective  of  this  program  is  to  conduct  an  algorithm  research  and  de¬ 
velopment  effort  that  will  result  in  the  demonstrated  capability  to  provide  accurate 


4 


NWC  TP  7207 


numerical  flowfield  data  for  situations  typical  of  weapon  carriage  and  release  from 
an  internal  weapon  bay.  This  program  permits  us  to  apply  and  specialize  the  very 
general  algorithmic  capability  that  we  have  developed  to  the  challenging  problem  of 
computing  the  airloads  and  separation  characteristics  of  internally  carried  weapons. 
It  will  serve  as  a  key  demonstration  of  the  flexibility  of  the  new  capability  that  we 
have  built.  In  turn,  we  hope  to  provide  NWC  with  a  very  powerful  new  CFD  ca¬ 
pability  that  will  serve  them  well  for  years  to  come.  During  the  first  phase  of  the 
program,  the  goal  is  to  demonstrate  inviscid  3-d  static  and  2-d  dynamic  capability. 
In  the  next  phase,  the  focus  will  be  on  viscous  static  3-d  and  inviscid  dynamic  3-d 
capability.  The  third  phase  deals  with  3-d  viscous  and  dynamic  CFD  analysis  of  a 
missile  emerging  from  a  weapon  bay  for  which  the  missile  trajectory  is  determined 
by  integrating  the  CFD  flowfield  solver  with  a  six  degree-of- freedom  trajectory  algo¬ 
rithm.  This  report  presents  work  done  during  Phase  I  along  with  detailed  reference 
material  for  the  overall  computational  framework. 

This  report  is  organized  into  two  major  sections  identified  by  Roman  numerals: 
Section  I  is  a  synopsis  of  Phase  I  work  and  Section  II  contains  all  the  technical  details. 
These  major  sections  include  several  chapters  each.  For  convenience,  these  are  iden¬ 
tified  as  sections  with  Arabic  numerical  identifiers.  Section  2  presents  a  summary  of 
work  performed  during  Phase  I  followed  by  Section  3  containing  conclusions  that  can 
be  drawn  at  this  point  during  the  three-phase  program.  Section  4  discusses  the  overall 
numerical  framework  for  the  current  generation  of  UNIVERSE-series  codes  and  forms 
the  background  for  all  subsequent  sections.  Section  5  presents  three  sets  of  equations, 
including  the  Euler  equations,  which  can  be  solved  using  the  UNIVERSE-series  code 
under  consideration.  Section  6  presents  various  exact  and  approximate  “Riemann 
Solvers.”  Section  7  presents  detailed  descriptions  of  the  geometry  treatment  for  three 
types  of  conservation  cells  (hexahedron,  triangular  prism,  and  tetrahedron).  Section 
8  deals  with  treatment  of  “topology”  —  the  way  the  cells  are  connected  together 
and  how  the  connectivities  change  when  new  nodes  and  cells  are  introduced  or  links 
removed.  Section  9  presents  in  detail  the  primary  grid  generation  method  (TRIM3D) 
that  is  used  to  generate  3-d  unstructured  tetrahedral  meshes  used  in  this  effort  as  well 
as  a  briefer  description  of  a  2-d  unstructured  grid  method  (TRIM2D).  This  section 
also  includes  a  discussion  of  methods  that  can  be  employed  to  “smooth”  the  meshes 
as  well  as  a  consideration  of  issues  involved  in  constructing  meshes  with  higher-order 


5 


NWC  TP  7207 


geometry  information.  Store-tracking  and  corresponding  grid- adaptation  issues  are 
covered  in  Section  10.  The  links  between  boundary  condition  and  geometry  specifi¬ 
cations  as  well  as  the  specific  implementation  of  boundary  condition  procedures  in 
UNIVERSE-series  codes  at  this  time  are  presented  in  Section  11.  Software  architec¬ 
ture  issues  are  discussed  in  Section  12.  This  includes  reasons  why  the  C  language  is 
particularly  well  suited  to  this  effort.  The  various  options  and  features  possible  under 
UNIVERSE-series  algorithm  and  code  framework  axe  presented  in  Section  13.  Sev¬ 
eral  illustrative  examples  are  presented  in  Section  14  including  examples  with  scalar 
equations  and  the  Euler  equations,  and  problems  in  one,  two  and  three  dimensions. 
Section  15  includes  a  compilation  of  all  cited  references. 


2.0  SUMMARY 


During  Phase  I,  the  focus  was  on  inviscid  flows  (2-d  dynamic  and  3-d  static).  A 
summary  of  progress  for  Phase  I  follows: 

1.  Three  versions  of  a  UNIVERSE-series  flow  solver  were  delivered  to  NWC.  The 
first  is  UNIV1  and  is  written  entirely  in  Fortran.  The  second  is  UNIVCF  and 
includes  sections  in  C  which  can  be  linked  with  the  Fortran  routines  in  UNI VI. 
The  third  is  UNFVC  which  is  almost  totally  written  in  the  C  language.  It  is 
expected  that  UNIVC  will  be  the  version  to  grow  into  Phase  II.  The  exercise  of 
developing  the  software  in  C  has  verified  the  expectation  that  the  C  language 
offers  greater  flexibility  for  implementing  many  needed  versatile  features. 

2.  A  2-d  unstructured  grid  generation  software  (TRIM2D)  has  been  delivered  to 
NWC. 

3.  A  3-d  unstructured  grid  generation  software  (TRIM3D)  has  been  delivered  to 
NWC. 

4.  The  UNIVC  flow  solver  includes  a  built-in  2-d  plotting  capability  that  can  display 
results  on  Tektronix  terminals.  A  pilot  version  of  3-d  visualization  software  that 
is  compatible  with  the  flow  solver  and  that  runs  on  Silicon  Graphics  workstations 
has  also  been  delivered  to  NWC. 


6 


NWCTP7207 


5.  A  3-d  static  inviscid  CFD  flow  field  computation  around  an  F-18  configuration 
with  pylon,  rack  and  bombs  has  been  demonstrated. 

6.  The  inviscid  flowfield  for  a  3-d  missile  in  a  3-d  cavity  has  been  completed. 

7.  A  store-tracking  approach  that  exploits  local  grid  adaptation  (addition  of  cells, 
removal  of  short  links,  etc.)  has  been  developed. 

8.  A  2-d  case  of  a  weapon  in  a  bomb  bay  has  been  computed  as  a  static  case  and 
the  corresponding  dynamic  computation  is  in  progress. 

9.  Several  1-d,  2-d  and  3-d  unit  problems  have  been  solved  and  are  included  in 
Section  14  as  illustrative  examples  along  with  results  for  items  5-8  above. 

10.  Version  description  documents  and  user  manuals  have  been  written  for  UNIVC, 
TRIM3D,  and  TRIM2D.  Similar  information  for  the  graphics  software  will  be 
provided  in  Phase  II  when  that  software  development  has  stabilized. 


7 


NWC  TP  7207 


3.0  CONCLUSIONS 


Section  II  will  show  that  a  new  CFD  framework  has  been  developed  which  is  more 
accurate  and  versatile  than  the  previous  state  of  the  art  for  solving  fluid  dynamics 
problems  involving  complex  geometries  and  complex  flow  phenomena  such  as  shock 
waves.  Some  of  the  features  of  the  numerical  algorithms  are  listed  here. 

1.  The  grid  generation  method  is  able  to  automatically  generate  tetrahedral  meshes 
for  very  complex  topologies  and  the  flow  solver  is  able  to  accurately  compute  the 
solution  on  the  resulting  unstructured  mesh.  Three  3-d  examples  are  provided 
in  Section  14  (Space  Shuttle  multibody  configuration,  F-18  configuration  with 
pylon  and  external  stores,  missile  in  a  cavity). 

2.  Various  levels  of  solution  accuracy  can  be  selected.  Up  to  sixth-order  spatial 
accuracy  is  available  for  1-d  problems  and  up  to  fourth-order  spatial  accuracy 
can  be  specified  for  2-d  and  3-d  problems.  Higher  orders  of  solution  accuracy 
can  be  implemented  within  the  general  framework  if  desired.  Only  second-order 
accuracy  was  required  in  Phase  I  but  higher-order  accuracy  was  folded  in  from 
the  beginning  anyway. 

3.  The  solution  accuracy  must  be  combined  with  corresponding  accuracy  of  geome¬ 
try  treatment.  The  geometry  formulation  is  also  extremely  general  and  allows  the 
specification  and  use  of  higher  order  shape  functions  to  represent  the  geometry 
of  each  conservation  cell. 

4.  The  grid  generation  methodology  must  be  able  to  provide  such  higher  order  mesh 
representation.  During  Phase  I,  standard  linear  tetrahedra  were  generated.  In 
Phase  II,  a  method  to  construct  higher  order  geometry  representations  from  such 
meshes  will  be  implemented. 

5.  Several  variations  of  Essentially  nonoscillatory  (ENO)  interpolation  techniques 
have  been  explored  and  implemented  in  order  to  evaluate  the  pros  and  cons  of 
various  approaches. 

6.  Several  Riemann  Solvers  are  included  to  permit  the  investigation  of  the  significant 
properties  of  each.  The  exact  Riemann  Solver  is  computationally  more  expensive 


8 


NWC  TP  7207 


than  simpler  ones.  In  the  future,  a  strategy  of  automatically  selecting  the  most 
inexpensive  but  adequate  Riemann  Solver  for  each  cell  or  face  based  on  the  local 
flow  behaviour  can  easily  be  considered  because  of  the  availability  of  such  a 
spectrum  of  Riemann  Solvers. 

7.  The  UNIVC  flow  solver  can  solve  1-d,  2-d,  axisymmetric  and  3-d  problems.  This 
will  enable  a  typical  user  to  achieve  a  higher  degree  of  proficiency  in  using  the 
software  because  all  problems  can  be  solved  using  the  same  code.  This  also 
permits  much  more  extensive  validation  of  the  methodology  than  is  possible 
with  separate  codes. 

8.  The  geometry  specification  is  always  assumed  to  be  three  dimensional.  In  order 
to  perform  a  1-d  computation,  a  collection  of  3-d  cells  strung  along  one  dimension 
can  be  used.  In  addition  to  this,  masks  can  be  specified  in  order  to  avoid  com¬ 
puting  fluxes  for  all  faces  for  a  problem  which  is  not  3-d.  Proper  symmetries  can 
be  specified  for  certain  cell  faces  for  problems  with  known  symmetries  (such  as 
axisymmetric  flow).  The  polynomials  of  the  solution  variables  need  only  match 
the  dimensionality  requirement  for  the  solution.  For  1-d  problems,  for  example, 
polynomials  using  powers  of  x  can  be  selected;  for  2-d  problems  polynomials  in 
x  and  y  are  used;  only  for  3-d  problems  are  all  independent  variables  significant 
for  the  solution  approximation.  All  these  features  result  in  the  computational 
efficiency  matching  the  complexity  of  the  problem.  Therefore,  even  though  one 
code  can  do  many  types  of  problems,  the  computational  time  required  is  about 
as  small  for  simpler  (1-d,  2-d,  or  axisymmetric,  for  example)  problems  as  codes 
constructed  only  for  the  simpler  case. 

9.  The  UNIVC  flow  solver  can  solve  any  desired  set  of  equations.  In  particular, 
three  equation  sets  are  built  in:  a)  the  linear  wave  equation,  2)  the  nonlinear 
wave  equation  (inviscid  Burgers’  equation  in  one  or  more  dimensions),  and  3)  the 
Euler  equations  of  inviscid  flow.  This  feature  results  in  an  ability  to  check  out  the 
properties  of  the  numerical  algorithm  in  controlled  conditions  and  for  a  variety 
of  physical  phenomena  in  many  disciplines,  with  each  successful  computation 
serving  as  corroboration  for  the  other.  For  example,  model  equations  such  as  the 
linear  equation  and  Burgers’  equation  serve  tc  test  the  properties  of  the  method 
by  direct  comparison  with  known  exact  solutions.  The  ability  to  perform  1-d, 


9 


NWC  TP  7207 


2-d  and  3-d  problems  using  the  same  code  enhances  this  aspect. 

10.  A  simple  2-d  plotting  capability  is  built  into  the  flow  solver  for  quick  diagnosis  of 
the  solution.  Eventually,  this  will  be  expanded  to  include  3-d  plotting  on  graph¬ 
ics  work  stations.  The  goal  of  integrated  post-processing  capability  will  allow 
maximum  consistency  between  numerical  algorithm  and  visualization,  analysis 
of  results,  etc. 

11.  The  UNIVC  code  is  constructed  in  such  a  fashion  that  memory  required  can  be 
traded  versus  speed.  For  example,  least-squares  polynomial  coefficients  can  be 
computed  and  stored  at  the  beginning  of  the  run  (assuming  mesh  point  locations 
and  topology  do  not  change).  This  increases  the  amount  of  required  main  mem¬ 
ory  but  decreases  the  computational  time.  Similarly  cell-face  normals  can  either 
be  computed  and  stored  once  for  later  repetitive  use  or  can  be  computed  upon 
demand. 

12.  It  is  therefore  clear  that  many  features  have  been  built-in  with  both  efficiciency 
and  flexibility  in  mind.  At  this  point  the  topological  requirements  for  adapting 
the  grid  to  motion  of  the  external  store  is  still  in  a  state  of  flux  and  until  the 
picture  is  clearer,  the  focus  will  be  on  modularity  and  flexibility  rather  than  effi¬ 
ciency.  However,  computatational  speed  issues  such  as  vectorization  and  paral¬ 
lelization  on  shared  memory  multiprocessors  have  been  and  are  being  consciously 
considered  during  all  stages  of  code  development. 

13.  A  very  flexible  definition  of  “neighborhood”  (which  cells  are  near  a  given  con¬ 
servation  cell)  is  part  of  the  UNIVERS E-series  code  framework.  In  the  specific 
implementation  in  UNIVC,  only  certain  aspects  of  this  flexibility  are  being  ex¬ 
ploited  but  the  generality  is  anticipated  to  come  in  useful  in  future  Phases. 

14.  A  hierarchy  of  cell-face  quadrature  for  integration  of  geometry  and  solution  vari¬ 
ables  over  cell  boundaries  is  provided.  For  example,  the  mid-point  quadrature 
formula  for  solution  variables  is  useful  for  accuracies  up  to  second  order.  For 
higher  order  accuracies,  if  the  cell  faces  are  planar,  one  can  avoid  computing 
more  than  one  set  of  values  for  the  cell-face  normals  even  while  using  four-point 
quadrature  formulae.  In  the  most  general  and  expensive  situation,  cell-face  nor¬ 
mals  must  be  evaluated  at  each  quadrature  point.  Once  again,  the  focus  is  on 


10 


NWC  TP  7207 


combining  efficiency  and  generality  in  an  optimal  fashion. 

15.  The  UNIVC  flow  solver  can  use  three  types  of  cells:  hexahedral,  triangular  prism, 
and  tetrahedral.  This  level  of  unification  is  unique.  This  feature  allows  the  use 
of  even  existing  structured  grids  while,  at  the  same  time,  exploiting  the  improve¬ 
ments  in  solution  accuracy  possible  within  the  new  framework  which  employs 
true  multi-dimensional  interpolation  even  in  second-order  accuarcy  mode.  In 
this  fashion,  all  the  investment  made  over  many  years  by  most  CFD  organiza¬ 
tions  in  developing  or  otherwise  acquiring  structured  grid  generation  capability 
is  exploited  rather  than  wasted. 

16.  The  framework  includes  user-selectable  accuracy  of  temporal  evolution.  This  can 
be  suitably  coupled  with  the  spatial  accuracy  selection  in  such  a  fashion  as  to 
once  again  optimize  the  computational  effort.  For  example,  second-order  spatial 
accuracy  can  be  couple  to  first-order  time  accuracy  for  steady  state  problems 
and  with  second-order  time  accuracy  for  time-dependent  problems.  Fourth-order 
spatial  accuracy  may  require  the  use  of  fourth-order  Runge-Kutta  time  evolution 
operator  for  stability. 

17.  In  the  above,  it  is  clear  that  the  numerical  framework  and  the  implementation 
of  the  various  software  pieces  have  been  selected  to  permit  maximum  flexibility 
and  versatility.  For  example,  higher  order  accuracy  capability  in  the  geometry 
and  solution  variables  have  been  built  in  from  the  beginning  even  if  during  a 
given  Phase  or  for  a  particular  series  of  computations,  all  the  features  of  the 
methodology  will  not  necessarily  be  required. 


11 


NWCTP  7207 


SECTION  n 

TECHNICAL  DISCUSSION 


13 


NWC  TP  7207 


4.0  NUMERICAL  FRAMEWORK  FOR  UNIVERSE-SERIES  CODES 


We  now  present  background  information  about  the  new  numerical  capability  that 
has  been  developed  for  the  conservation  laws  of  fluid  dynamics.  The  approach  is  based 
on  algorithms  that  can  be  of  higher  than  second  order  accuracy  which  are  embedded 
in  a  very  flexible  geometric  framework  that  includes  both  structured  and  unstruc¬ 
tured  grids.  While  the  cell  shapes  can  be  of  any  type,  the  book-keeping  strategy  is 
of  the  “unstructured”  type  and  is  even  more  versatile  than  popular  unstructured- 
grid  approaches.  Codes  developed  using  the  new  formulations  will  be  part  of  the 
UNIVERSE- series.  UNIVERSE  denotes  a  Unification  of  essentially  Jtfonoscillatory 
Interpolation  techniques  with  a  geometrically  VERSatile  implementation.  The  ENO 
(Essentially  NonOscillatory)1-4  interpolation  facilitates  the  construction  of  numer¬ 
ical  algorithms  which  can  “capture”  discontinuities  such  as  shock  waves  and  which 
are  of  arbitrarily  high  orders  of  accuracy,  thereby  transcending  the  inherent  accu¬ 
racy  limitations  of  TVD  schemes.  Until  recently  ENO  ideas  were  limited  to  either 
one-dimensional  or  Cartesian  multi-dimensional  applications  or  assumed  smooth  co¬ 
ordinate  transformations.8  UNIVERSE  codes  implement  a  truly  multidimensional 
unrestricted  version  of  ENO  schemes  that  work  with  arbitrary  cell  shapes.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  hexahedral,  triangular  prism  and  tetrahedral  elements  (conservation  cells) 
can  all  be  covered  in  a  unified  manner.  This  also  implies  that  both  structured  and 
unstructured  book-keeping  schemes  can  be  employed  to  conveniently  treat  complex 
topologies.  New,  fully  automatic,  unstructured  grid  generation  methods  have  also 
been  developed  for  integration  with  UNIVERSE- series  flow  solvers.  Related  material 
can  also  be  found  in  Ref.  6. 

Integral  Form  of  Conservation  Laws 


The  new  algorithms  have  been  developed  for  the  general  hyperbolic  system  of 
conservation  laws  represented  by 


,  &h_  ,  dfi  ,  d/s 

dt  dx  +  dy  dz 


(4.1) 


which  is  in  the  “conservation-law  form.”  The  dependent  (conserved)  variables  are 
denoted  by  q.  The  Cartesian  coordinate  directions  (independent  variables)  are  x, 


14 


NWC  TP  7207 


y  and  z.  The  components  of  flux  in  the  three  coordinate  directions  are  f\ ,  ji  and 
/*.  An  analogous  formulation  has  also  been  developed  for  the  quasi-linear  or  “non¬ 
conservation-law”  form  of  the  equations  given  by 


!+*&+*£+*  gt-o 

at  ax  ay  oz 


(4.2) 


However,  in  the  present  discussion,  only  the  conservation-law  form  will  be  considered. 
Because  of  its  applicability  to  “shock  capturing”,  the  conservation-law  form  is  more 
general  and  appropriate  numerical  formulations  based  on  it  will  be  applicable  to  all 
flow-field  regimes  including  subsonic  and  supersonic  flows. 

The  conservation-law  form  shown  in  Eq.  4.1  is  in  the  differential  form.  We  now 
present  the  integral  form  of  the  conservation  laws  which  can  easily  be  derived  from  the 
differential  form  by  integrating  Eq.  4.1  with  respect  to  x,y,  z  over  any  conservation 
cell  whose  volume  is  V. 

J  J  Jv(m  +  jt  +  ^  +  %)ixdyizi‘0  ■  (43) 


This  can  be  rewritten  in  vector  notation  as 


d_ 

dt 


JJJy'***+JJJv 


( V  •  F)  dx  dy  dz 


=  0  . 


(4.4) 


In  the  above, 

F  —  IiJ  +  /jfc  +  fit  •  (4.5) 

Applying  the  Gauss  divergence  theorem,  we  can  convert  the  volume  integral  into  a 
surface  integral. 

^(?V)  +  /  J(F  ■  n)dS  =0  .  (4.6) 

In  the  above  equation,  the  cell  average  of  the  dependent  variables  are  denoted  by  q. 
The  outward  unit  normal  at  any  point  of  the  boundary  surface  of  a  cell  has  been 
denoted  by  n  =  hxj  +  nyjfc  +  ritl. 


s_LUsls£L 

USvW 


(4.7) 


15 


NWC  TP  7207 


The  integral  form  of  the  conservation  laws  given  by  Eq.  4.6  defines  a  system  of  equa¬ 
tions  for  the  cell  average  values  of  the  dependent  variables.  In  order  to  construct 
numerical  methods  to  solve  the  integral  form  of  the  conservation  laws,  we  must  be 
able  to  define  cell  geometries,  approximate  the  dependent  variables,  develop  spatial 
discretization  procedures,  develop  time  integration  procedures  to  update  the  cell  av¬ 
erages,  etc.  These  topics  are  covered  below. 

Cell  Geometry 


A  very  general  and  flexible  numerical  formulation  has  been  developed  to  solve 
the  integral  form  of  the  governing  conservation  laws.  While  any  cell  shape  definition 
can  be  used,  details  have  been  developed  for  three  types  in  particular:  (1)  tetrahedral 
element,  (2)  triangular  prism  element,  and  (3)  hexahedral  element  (Fig.  4.1).  The 
name  element  will  be  used  interchangeably  with  the  term  “conservation  cell.”  The 
entire  computational  region  is  assumed  to  be  divided  up  into  a  finite  number  of 
elements  or  conservation  cells.  The  integral  form  of  the  conservation  laws  will  be 
applied  to  each  such  cell.  The  hexahedral  cell  provides  consistency  with  conventional 
structured-grid  formulations.  The  triangular  prism  can  be  useful  in  situations  where 
the  grid  generation  can  be  generated  plane  by  plane.  The  tetrahedral  element  will 
result  in  an  inherently  three-dimensional  formulation.  Encompassing  these  three 
types  provides  maximum  flexibility  in  our  approach  to  treat  complex  geometries. 

Each  element  utilizes  a  local  coordinate  system  (Fig.  4.1).  Inside  each 

element,  the  physical  coordinates  (x,  y,  z)  are  expressed  as  polynomials  in  terms  of 
the  local  coordinate  system.  We  now  define  three-dimensional,  two-dimensional,  and 
one-dimensional  polynomials. 


P3(-,  •,  •)  =  3-d  polynomial 

P2(’,-)  =  2-d  polynomial  (4.8) 

Pi(  )  =  1-d  polynomial 


A  “shape  function”  approach  is  very  useful  in  the  definition  of  the  cell  geometry. 
The  coordinates  x,y,z  are  expanded  in  terms  of  the  appropriate  shape  functions  for 


16 


NWC  TP  7207 


Fig.  4. 


1  Three  types  of  conservation  cells  and  their  local  coordinate  system 


I 

I 


I 


17 


NWC  TP  7207 


each  type  of  element.  The  geometry  polynomials  are  defined  for  each  cell  and  their 
range  is  restricted  to  that  cell.  Discontinuities  in  geometry  can  exist  across  each  cell. 
Within  each  cell,  by  definition,  the  geometry  will  be  smooth. 

The  simplest  tetrahedral  element  comprises  4  nodes  and  4  triangular  faces.  The 
geometry  variables  are  expanded  in  terms  of  a  single  three-dimensional  polynomial 
in  the  local  variables. 

=  y.  ■<')/•  (4-9) 

nodes 

The  simplest  triangular  prism  element  comprises  6  nodes,  2  triangular  faces  and 
3  quadrilateral  faces  (a  total  of  5  faces).  The  geometry  variables  are  expanded  in 
terms  of  the  tensor  product  of  a  two-dimensional  polynomial  and  a  one-dimensional 
polynomial. 

=  Y  (410) 

nodes 

The  simplest  hexahedral  element  comprises  8  nodes  and  6  quadrilateral  faces. 
The  geometry  variables  are  defined  in  terms  of  the  tensor  product  of  three  one¬ 
dimensional  polynomials. 

=  Y  *<({■’>•")*  (4U) 

nodes 

Higher  order  elements  (Fig.  4.2)  can  also  be  defined  and  used  but  will  not  be 
considered  in  this  discussion  or  in  the  proposed  effort.  In  the  above,  /  can  be  x,  or  y 
or  2.  Each  of  the  polynomials  on  the  right  hand  side  of  Eqs.  4.9,  4.10  and  4.11  can 
be  of  arbitrary  degree. 

Given  nodal  values  of  z,  y,  z,  we  can  evaluate  the  geometry  polynomials  at  any 
point  of  the  cell  that  has  been  defined  in  terms  of  the  local  coordinate  system.  In 
particular,  we  will  need  to  find  (z,  y,  z)  coordinates  of  quadrature  points  on  each  face 


18 


NWCTP7207 


as  well  as  the  components  of  the  outward  point  normal  at  these  quadrature  points. 
The  geometry  polynomials  also  yield  the  metrics  x{,y{,2(,  xn,  y,, 2,,  y0,20-  In 

order  to  compute  the  outward  pointing  normal  at  any  point  of  a  given  face  of  a  given 
cell,  the  following  steps  are  defined. 

1)  Obtain  two  linearly  independent  vectors  on  the  face  passing  through  the  given 
point.  Such  vectors  can  easily  be  defined  in  terms  of  the  local  metrics  given 
above. 

2)  The  cross  product  of  these  two  vectors  is  in  the  direction  of  the  normal  to  the 
face. 


The  basic  numerical  framework  is  based  on  a  finite-element-like  (FEL)  formula¬ 
tion. 

a)  We  have  already  seen  that  the  conservation  cells  are  finite  elements. 

b)  In  this  section,  we  will  approximate  the  variation  of  dependent  variables  within 
each  cell  using  polynomials  of  the  physical  independent  variables  x,y,  2. 

However,  the  CFD  formulation  to  be  presented  here  differs  in  several  ways  from 
traditional  finite-element  (FE)  approaches. 

c)  The  CFD  FEL  approach  will  use  piecewise  polynomial  interpolation  for  the  de¬ 
pendent  variables.  These  polynomials  can  be  discontinuous  across  cell  bound¬ 
aries;  for  smooth  solution  behavior,  the  difference  between  left  and  right  values 
at  a  cell  face  common  to  two  cells  will  be  small.  Such  a  piecewise  polynomial 
approach  facilitates  “capturing”  discontinuities. 

d)  The  discretization  of  the  governing  equations  follows  directly  from  the  integral 
form  of  the  conservation  laws.  No  variational  principle  or  method  of  weighted 
residuals  or  other  indirect  approach  is  employed. 

e)  The  dependent  variable  polynomials  are  directly  written  in  terms  of  x,y,  r  and 
not  in  terms  of  the  element  coordinate  system  variables  £,rj,c.  The  domain  and 


20 


NWC  TP  7207 


range  of  the  geometry  polynomials  is  restricted  to  a  single  cell.  The  domain  of 
the  dependent  variable  polynomials  is  not  thus  restricted.  We  will  soon  see  that 
for  the  purpose  of  evaluating  the  polynomial  coefficients,  the  dependent  variable 
polynomials  are  evaluated  over  many  neighboring  cells.  At  cell  faces  common  to 
two  or  more  cells,  the  overlapping  polynomial  definitions  lead  to  the  piecewise 
polynomial  approach  and  helps  define  left  and  right  states  before  resolving  them 
using  a  Riemann  solver. 

To  provide  capability  to  compute  1-d,  2-d  and  3-d  flows  efficiently,  the  dependent 
variable  polynomials  are  defined  to  be 

/(*»  y,  *)  =  Pi(x,  y,  2)  (4.12  a) 

or 

/(x,y)  =  P2(x,y)  (4.126) 

or 

/(*)  =  -Pl(*)  (4.12c). 

The  geometry  is  always  defined  in  3-d  space.  Using  the  appropriate  dependent  vari¬ 
able  polynomial  type,  the  solution  can  be  forced  to  be  1-d,  2-d,  or  3-d.  In  this  manner, 
we  can  easily  compute  1-d,  2-d,  and  3-d  solutions  with  the  same  flow  solver.  All  that 
is  required  in  1-d,  for  example,  is  to  string  together  a  1-d  collection  of  cells.  In 
the  present  effort,  we  do  not  consider  tensor  product  polynomials  for  the  dependent 
variables.  However,  these  and  other  approaches  have  been  developed  and  applied  by 
Science  Center  CFD  researchers  elsewhere. 

In  what  follows,  we  only  consider  the  case  of  three-dimensional  dependent  vari¬ 
able  polynomials  for  the  sake  of  brevi  .  of  presentation.  The  two-  and  one-dimensional 
simplifications  can  be  derived  in  straight-forward  fashion. 

We  use  a  hierarchy  of  polynomials  depending  on  the  desired  accuracy.  The 
simplest  involves  only  the  constant  term. 

Pa(x,y,2)  =po  .  (4.13) 


21 


NWCTP7207 


The  next  level  includes  linear  terms. 


P3(x,y,z)  =  P0+PlI+P2y  +  J>3  2 


(4.14) 


The  next  level  includes  quadratic  terms  also. 


P3(x,  y,z)=po+piX  +  p7y  +  p3z+p4X2+piy2+p627+p7xy  +  p6yz+p9zx 

=  £p,x'(V(,V(,) 

•= 0 

(4.15) 

Within  the  general  framework,  even  higher  order  polynomials  can  be  utilized.  How¬ 
ever,  it  is  anticipated  that  quadratic  polynomials  will  result  in  accuracies  greater 
than  conventionally  achieved  in  general  purpose  flow  solvers  applicable  to  complex 
geometry  problems.  In  the  UNIVC  flow  solver,  cubic  polynomials  are  also  selectable 
in  two  and  three  dimensions  and  even  fourth  and  fifth  degree  polynomials  can  be 
used  in  one  dimensional  problems.  In  Phase  I,  computations  for  large  scale  problems 
were  limited  to  second-order  accuracy.  However,  several  unit  problem  examples  were 
computed  with  higher-degree  piecewise  polynomials.  Piecewise  linear  polynomials 
result  in  second-order  accuracy,  quadratic  polynomials  lead  to  third-order  accuracy, 
and  so  on.  In  Phase  II,  piecewise  quadratic  and  cubic  polynomials  will  be  explored 
in  more  depth  to  analyse  the  advantages/disadvantages  of  using  increased  order  of 
accuracy. 

In  dealing  with  the  integral  form  of  the  conservation  laws,  we  must  deal  with 
cell  averages  of  the  dependent  variables.  If  we  express  the  dependent  variables  as 
polynomials,  we  must  deal  also  with  cell  averages  of  the  polynomials. 


^7  J  J  ^  Pi  J  J  zK,)  ixiydz^ 


(4.16) 


In  the  above  we  see  that  the  average  value  of  a  polynomial  taken  over  an  element  or 
conservation  cell  can  be  expressed  as  a  weighted  sum  of  the  polynomial  coefficients. 


22 


NWC  TP  7207 


The  weights  a,  depend  on  the  shape  of  the  particular  cell  over  which  the  average  is 
defined. 


J  J  Jv  xj(i)  yk(i)  z,(i)  dV 

USv™ 


(4.17) 


It  is  convenient  to  define  the  weights  in  terms  of  the  gradient  of  a  vector  X  defined 
in  turn  by 


v  _I 
A,"3 


xj(.)+i 


;'(»')  + 1 


/<•>*'<•>  j  +  x 


Hi)  1 - 2‘(i)  *  +  xHi)yt(i)  j_  _  J1 


Hi)  +  1 


/(*)  +  1  J 


(4.18) 


In  terms  of  this  vector,  the  weights  a,  are  given  by 


—  vfj  Sv^s')dV 


(4.19) 


In  the  above  Eq.  4.19,  we  have  been  able  to  simplify  the  volume  integration  to  a  surface 
integration  in  the  usual  way  by  applying  the  Gauss  divergence  theorem.  Comparing 
Eq.  4.6  and  Eq.  4.19,  we  see  that  the  surface  integration  formula  applies  to  both  the 
dependent  variable  flux  vector  F  and  the  “geometry  flux  vector”  X. 

In  what  follows,  numerical  procedures  developed  to  approximate  surface  integrals 
must  deem  to  apply  to  either  type  of  vector.  We  first  divide  the  surface  integral 
into  component  parts  that  apply  over  each  distinct  face  or  side  of  any  cell  under 
consideration.  We  then  replace  the  integral  on  each  face  with  a  numerical  quadrature. 


///■* 


)dS  = 


E  f  /.<*■•>« 

faces 

=  E  E 

faces  quads. 


(4.20) 


Here,  “quads.”  is  an  abbreviation  for  “quadrature  points.”  For  second-order  applica¬ 
tions,  we  use  the  midpoint  rule  for  quadrature  for  the  solution  flux  integration  and  a 
4-point  Gaussian  quadrature  for  computing  the  geometry  weights  a,.  For  higher-order 
calculations,  the  higher-order  accurate  quadrature  formulae  are  used  for  the  solution 


23 


NWC  TP  7207 


flux  integration.  The  weights  of  the  quadrature  formulae  must  include  the  effect  of 
cell  surface  area  corresponding  to  the  given  face  and  such  weights  axe  denoted  by  5, 
in  the  above  equation.  The  midpoint  formula  can  be  represented  as 


(4.21) 


where  m  denotes  the  centroid  of  each  face.  Even  higher-order  quadrature  formulae 
may  be  employed  if  necessary  in  the  future. 


Outline  of  Solution  Procedure 


The  original  initial  value  problem  (IVP)  for  the  differential  form  of  the  conser¬ 
vation  laws  specifies  initial  values  of  the  dependent  variables.  In  the  IVP  for  the 
integral  form  of  the  conservation  laws,  initial  values  of  cell  averages  of  the  dependent 
variables  will  be  defined.  Given  such  initial  values,  the  three  steps  used  to  set  up  the 
discretization  procedure  for  the  integral  form  of  the  conservation  laws  are  as  follows. 

(i)  Define  dependent  variable  polynomials  in  each  cell  so  that  the  cell  average  of 
the  polynomial  approximation  matches  the  cell  average  of  the  dependent  vari¬ 
able  which  is  either  given  as  part  of  the  initial  value  specification  or  obtained 
by  updating  the  cell  averages  during  subsequent  steps  of  the  solution  process. 
This  process  of  defining  pointwise  polynomial  behavior  from  known  values  of  cell 
averages  is  called  the  “reconstruction  procedure”  and  is  the  major  subject  of  the 
next  section. 

(ii)  Evaluate  the  polynomials  at  all  quadrature  points.  This  will  lead  to  “left”  and 
“right”  values  at  each  quadrature  point  which  lies  on  a  face  common  to  two  cells. 

(iii)  Construct  the  solution  of  a  local  Riemann  problem  using  these  left  and  right 
states  and  from  this  evaluate  the  numerical  flux.  Use  such  numerical  fluxes  in 
Eq.  4.20  or  Eq.  4.21  and  evaluate  the  right  hand  side  of 

^{qV)  =  - j  J  (F  n)dS  (4.22) 


24 


NWC  TP  7207 


(iv)  Steps  (i)-(iii)  complete  the  discretization  of  the  right  hand  side  of  Eq.  4.22. 
To  the  resulting  semi-discrete  system  of  equations,  we  apply  a  suitable  time- 
integration  procedure  such  as  Heun’s  method  (for  second-order  accuracy)  or  the 
fourth-order  accurate  Runge-Kutta  scheme. 

Reconstruction  of  Piecewise  Polynomials 


For  cell  C,  the  corresponding  polynomial  may  be  written  as 

Pf(x,y.z)  =  £><V(i)  (4.23) 

1=0 

In  order  to  define  this  polynomial,  we  need  to  know  the  polynomial  coefficients  pp 
which  must  be  determined  by  a  suitable  procedure.  One  of  the  conditions  that  this 
polynomial  must  satisfy  is 

Pi  =  (4.24) 

i 

In  addition  to  Eq.  4.24,  we  need  np  more  appropriate  equations  to  solve  for  pp,  i  = 
0, . . .  ,np.  For  example,  if  we  match  the  cell  average  of  Pc(x,y,z)  with  9^  over  np 
neighboring  cells  as  well  as  for  cell  C,  we  will  obtain  a  total  of  np  + 1  equations  which 
will  be  sufficient  to  solve  for  all  (np  +  1)  coefficients  of  the  polynomial. 

nj) 

£<J>?  =  sn  N  =  C,NUN, . N„,  (4.25) 

1=0 

This  leads  to  the  matrix  system  of  equations  given  by 

AP  =  Q  (4.26) 

where  A  is  matrix  of  size  (np  +  1)  x  (np  +  1),  P  is  the  set  of  unknown  polynomial 
coefficients,  and  Q  is  the  collection  of  known  cell  averages  of  the  dependent  variables 
at  (np  +1)  cells  including  and  in  the  neighborhood  of  cell  C. 


25 


NWCTP7207 


Neighbors 

The  UNIVERSE- series  CFD  formulation  defines  a  “neighbor”  of  a  given  cell 
a  very  flexible  and  useful  way. 

First,  we  consider  two  types  of  cell  connectivities  (Fig.  4.3): 

(1)  Node-aligned  cells  (NAC) 

(2)  Surface-aligned  cells  (SAC) 

Next,  we  consider  different  types  of  neighbors: 

(1)  Touching  neighbors  (TN) 

These  include 

(la)  Common-node  neighbor  (CNN) 

(lb)  Common-face  neighbor  (CFN) 

(lc)  Touching-face  neighbor  (TFN) 

(2)  Proximity  neighbors  (PN) 

This  latter  type  is  defined  in  terms  of  distance  from  a  given  cell. 
Neighborhood  Hierarchy 

A  neighborhood  is  now  defined  to  be  a  collection  of  neighboring  cells. 

H°  is  the  cell  itself. 

H1  is  the  cell  and  its  neighbors. 

H 7  is  defined  as  the  union  of  H1  and  the  neighbors  of  all  the  cells  in  H1. 
This  process  may  be  continued  recursively. 


26 


NWCTP  7207 


Node  Aligned  Cells 
(NAC) 


Surface  Aligned  Cells 
(SAC) 


Fig.  4.3  Node-aligned  and  surface  aligned  cells 


27 


NWCTP7207 


Least-Squares  Reconstruction 


Let  us  now  consider  a  neighborhood  of  cells  constructed  hierarchically  from  one 
central  cell.  It  is,  in  general,  true  that  any  neighborhood  hierarchy  may  either  contain 
less  than  or  greater  than  ( np  +1)  cells  and  not  just  exactly  (np  +  1)  cells.  We  have 
already  considered  the  case  when  we  have  exactly  the  number  of  cells  required  to 
solve  for  the  number  of  polynomial  coefficients.  Now,  let  us  consider  the  case  when 
we  have  a  neighborhood  with  (ne  +  1)  cells  where  nc  >  np.  The  previous  hierarchical 
neighborhood  is  assumed  to  have  less  than  (np  +1)  cells.  In  this  case,  we  have  an 
overdetermined  set  of  equations  AP  =  Q  where  A  is  an  (nc  +  1)  x  (np  +1)  matrix 
and  Q  is  a  set  of  (nc  +1)  cell  averages. 

We  can  solve  this  set  of  equations  in  the  context  of  a  generalized  inverse  using  the 
least  squares  method.  We  first  subtract  the  equation  for  cell  C  from  all  the  remaining 
equations.  Let  the  resulting  set  of  equations  (with  the  row  and  column  corresponding 
to  cell  C  removed  from  consideration  temporarily)  be 

AP  =  Q  (4.27) 

It  is  clear  that  A  is  a  matrix  of  size  nc  x  np.  In  the  least-squares  method,  we  now 
solve  the  generalized  system  of  equations 

ATAP  =  ATQ  (4.28) 

By  solving  Eq.  4.28,  we  obtain  np  polynomial  coefficients.  Substituting  these  into  the 
equation  for  cell  C  we  have  separated  out  earlier,  we  obtain  the  remaining  polynomial 

_ 7* _ 

coefficients.  The  matrix  A  A  is  symmetric. 

The  resulting  reconstructed  polynomial  has  the  property  that  its  average  matches 
the  cell  average  qc  but  it  does  not  necessarily  match  any  other  cell  average.  How¬ 
ever,  the  average  of  the  polynomial  taken  over  the  region  defined  by  each  cell  in  the 
neighborhood  is  a  good  fit  to  all  the  corresponding  cell  averages  in  the  “least-squares” 
sense.  This  procedure  yields  an  eminently  satisfactory  algorithm  for  smooth  flows. 
For  another  reference  for  least-squares  quadratic  reconstruction,  refer  to  Barth.7 


28 


NWC  TP  7207 


ENO  Reconstruction 


Once  again,  let  us  consider  an  overdetermined  set  of  equations  to  solve  for  the 
polynomial  coefficients.  Now,  we  seek  to  obtain  a  “best”  polynomial  rather  than  a 
“least-squares”  one.  The  polynomial  should  result  in  an  Essentially  NonOscillatory 
(ENO)  interpolation.  As  always,  the  equation  for  cell  C  must  be  satisfied.  From  the 
remaining  nc  equations,  we  can  select  any  combination  of  np  equations  and  solve  the 
resulting  set  of  np  4-  1  equations.  There  are 

ft) 

such  combinations.  The  combination  that  yields  the  best  one  in  terms  of  its  ENO 
property  is  to  be  preferred.  For  example,  when  the  flow  field  contains  a  single  shock 
wave,  the  neighbors  selected  should  lie  on  the  same  side  of  the  shock  as  cell  C. 
This  approach  may  be  termed  the  “best  stencil”  formulation  and  has  been  applied 
very  successfully  in  various  forms  to  structured  grid  ENO  formulations.  Reference  8 
contains  many  different  approaches  to  this  task. 

Alternatively,  a  “best  term”  approach  has  also  been  tried  out.  In  this  formu¬ 
lation,  the  least-squares  polynomials  are  first  selected  for  all  cells.  Each  coefficient 
of  the  polynomial  in  a  given  cell  corresponds  to  the  appropriate  derivative  of  the 
polynomial  (up  to  a  constant  coefficient)  evaluated  at  the  centroid  of  the  cell.  We 
replace  each  term  obtained  by  using  the  least-squares  formulation  by  the  same  term 
(derivative  up  to  a  constant)  evaluated  at  the  center  of  the  cell  but  computed  using  a 
neighboring  cell’s  polynomial  if  certain  conditions  are  met:  e.g.,  the  absolute  value  of 
the  term  due  to  the  neighbor  polynomial  times  a  factor  greater  than  one  is  less  than 
the  absolute  value  of  the  term  due  to  the  polynomial  in  the  central  cell.  This  pro¬ 
cedure  is  performed  in  such  a  way  as  to  give  preference  to  the  original  least-squares 
polynomial. 

For  one-dimensional  shock-tube  problems,  it  has  often  been  demonstrated  that 
it  is  better  to  select  the  best  stencils  based  on  comparing  interpolates  of  local  char¬ 
acteristic  variables  and  not  the  conserved  dependent  variables.  However,  within  the 
context  of  unstructured  grid  formulations  this  approach  is  very  expensive  and  con¬ 
sideration  of  such  issues  is  postponed  for  future  work. 


29 


NWCTP7207 


Polynomial  Evaluation  at  Quadrature  Points 


Recall  LLat  quadrature  points  on  the  surface  of  a  cell  are  located  at  the  mid 
points  of  the  faces. 

(a)  For  CFN  type  of  neighboring  cells,  at  a  common  face  the  quadrature  points  from 
either  cell  are  at  the  same  physical  location  (Fig.  4.4)  . 

(b)  For  TFN  type  of  neighboring  cells,  on  a  touching  face  the  corresponding  quadra¬ 
ture  points  may  not  coincide  (Fig.  4.4).  “Left”  and  “right”  values  must  be  com¬ 
puted  at  each  of  the  quadrature  points  and  used  in  the  flux  integration.  A  more 
sophisticated  approach  can  also  be  used  to  identify  common  parts  of  touching 
faces  and  the  boundary  quadratures  rewritten  as  a  sum  of  quadratures  over  such 
common  regions.  TFN  type  of  cells  have  not  been  implemented  in  the  UNIVC 
code  and  further  consideration  of  related  ideas  is  avoided  in  this  report. 

Riemann  Solver 


At  every  quadrature  point,  we  have  a  local  Riemann  problem.  We  use  any  appro¬ 
priate  exact  or  approximate  Riemann  solver  to  resolve  the  left  and  right  states  and 
construct  a  numerical  flux.  For  example,  Roe’s,9-13  Godunov’s,13-14  Osher’s1 3,1 5-17 
or  even  a  Lax- Friedrichs  or  Rusanov  type  Riemann  solver  can  be  employed  and  in 
fact  have  been  incorporated  into  the  UNIVERSE-series  flow  solvers  provided  during 
Phase  I  to  NWC.  NWC’s  Dr,  Burman  has  also  added  another  Riemann  solver  due  to 
Harten  and  Lax19  and  this  has  also  been  added  to  the  UNIVC  code.  The  importance 
of  the  Riemann  solver  decreases  with  increasing  degree  of  interpolation  for  smooth 
problems. 


Time  Stepping  Scheme 


In  this  paper,  we  have  taken  a  semidiscrete  approach.  Other  alternatives  are 
given  in  Refs.  8  and  19.  A  second-order  time-accurate  formulation  is  given  below  as 
an  example.  This  is  fashioned  after  Heim’s  method  or  the  second-order  Runge-Kutta 


30 


NWCTP7207 


SC-1397-T 


Node  Aligned  Cells 


Fig.  4.4  Quadrature  points  for  two  types  of  neighbors 


31 


NWC  TP  7207 


method  (RK2).  The  RK4  method  can  be  implemented  in  similar  fashion.  Higher 
than  second-order  spatial  accuracy  results  in  reduced  numerical  dissipation  and  this 
sometimes  necessitates  the  use  of  the  fourth-order  Runge-Kutta  formulation  which 
has  a  larger  stability  range  than  the  second-order  Runge-Kutta  method. 

In  semidiscrete  form,  the  equations  to  be  solved  are 

£(qV)  =  RJfS(q.t)  (4.29) 


The  corresponding  time  stepping  method  can  be  written  as 

(q  V)1  =  (q  V)n  +  RHS^qt^At 
(qV)"*'  =  i  [(,-V)"+(,-V)'  +  ilMS(i’,f"+1)] 

The  fourth-order  accurate  Runge-Kutta  scheme  can  be  written  as 


*,  = RHS(qn,tn ) 

(«V)‘  =  (fVT  +  y*. 

k2  =  RHS(q~\f  +  y) 

(fV)*  + 

2  (4.31) 

k,  =  RHS(q7,t"  +  y) 

(9  V)3  =(,-V)"+A(lt, 

k ,  =  RHS(?,t"*') 

(ffV)*+1  =  (qV)"  +  %(k,+2k,+2k,  +  k.) 

U 

In  the  above,  the  explicit  dependence  of  RHS  on  t  is  useful  for  time-dependent 
problems  where  the  boundary  conditions  or  other  behavior  explicitly  depends  on 
time. 


32 


NWCTP7207 


5.0  CONSTITUTIVE  EQUATIONS 
The  Conservation  Laws 

The  principles  of  conservation  of  mass,  momentum,  and  energy  are  fundamental 
in  the  study  of  fluid  dynamics  and  similar  problems.  Model  conservation  laws  that 
are  simpler  than  the  Euler  or  Navier-Stokes  equations  of  fluid  dynamics  can  be  useful 
to  study  certain  aspects  of  the  whole  problem.  In  this  section  we  present  a  linear 
model  equation,  a  nonlinear  model  equation  and  the  Euler  equations  (for  perfect  gas). 
A  conservation  law  represents  the  principle  that  the  conserved  quantity  increases  or 
decreases  depending  on  whether  there  is  a  net  positive  or  negative  flux  of  the  quantity 
into  the  control  volume  being  considered.  When  the  size  of  cubical  control  volume 
is  permitted  to  shrink  to  zero  along  each  one  of  the  Cartesian  coordinate  directions, 
if  continuity  of  the  dependent  variables  is  assumed,  the  differential  conservation  law 
form  of  the  equations  shown  as  Eq.  4.1  results.  The  integral  form  of  the  conservation 
laws  shown  in  Eq.  4.6  truly  represents  the  original  statement  of  the  conservation 
principle  and  in  that  sense  can  be  thought  of  as  the  basic  form  from  which  the 
differential  form  can  be  derived  by  considering  the  limit  case  of  cell  volume  tending 
to  zero.  However,  since  one  is  able  to  go  from  one  form  to  the  other  using  the  steps 
outlined  at  the  beginning  of  Section  4  and  their  reverse,  the  particular  form  of  the 
equations  used  is  of  secondary  importance.  However,  the  differential  form  of  the 
equations  serve  as  a  convenient  means  to  catalog  the  constitutive  equations  being 
discussed  and  that  is  the  approach  taken  here. 

The  Strong-Conservation-Law  Form 

The  conservation  law  form  of  the  equations  (Eq.  4.1),  is  known  as  the  strong- 
conservation -law  form.  When  continuity  of  the  dependent  variables  can  be  assumed, 
the  equations  can  be  rewritten  in  the  “non-conservation-law”  form  given  by  Eq.  4.2. 
The  strong  conservation  law  form  of  the  equations  is  closely  connected  with  the 
existence  of  “weak”  solutions,20  i.e.  composite  solutions  composed  of  continuously 
differentiable  parts  which  satisfy  the  differential  form  (either  the  strong-conservation- 
law  form  or  the  non-conservation-law  form  is  sufficient  for  this  purpose)  together 
with  jump  discontinuities  that  satisfy  the  appropriate  jump  conditions.  In  fact  the 


33 


NWCTP72G7 


jump  conditions  are  derived  from  the  strong-conservation-law  form.  Since  more  than 
one  strong-conservation-law  form  of  the  equations  —  all  of  which  are  equivalent  for 
differentiable  functions  —  may  be  derivable,  the  specific  form  of  the  conservation 
laws  (in  particular,  the  choice  of  the  dependent  variables)  is  significant.  The  choice 
that  corresponds  most  directly  with  the  physical  processes  of  mass,  momentum,  and 
energy  conservation  are,  in  that  sense,  the  most  suitable. 

Numerical  methods  are  constructed  for  the  strong-conservation-law  form  of  the 
equations  in  such  a  manner  that  they  obey  a  “discrete  conservation  principle”  (sin¬ 
gle  numerical  flux  per  cell  face)  that  can  be  exploited  to  “capture”  shock  waves  and 
other  discontinuities.  The  numerical  framework  described  in  the  earlier  section  satis¬ 
fies  this  requirement.  Such  numerical  methods  can  compute  the  solution  in  smooth 
regions  of  the  fiowfield  to  the  desired  order  of  accuracy.  Additionally,  they  can,  with¬ 
out  explicitly  making  use  of  the  shock-jump  relations,  automatically  compute  across 
discontinuities.  In  order  to  achieve  the  required  order  of  accuracy  in  smooth  regions, 
polynomial  interpolation  using  the  appropriate  degree  of  reconstruction  is  employed 
in  the  numerical  framework  outlined  in  Section  4.  The  piecewise  polynomial  approach 
is  utilized  to  permit  the  approximation  of  solutions  with  discontinuities.  In  order  to 
avoid  undesirable  “spurious”  oscillations  (oscillations  that  are  not  to  be  expected  in 
the  exact  solution),  the  ENO  scheme  is  employed  at  the  approximation  level.  This  is 
coupled  to  “Riemann  Solvers”  that  represent  the  physics  of  hyperbolic  conservation 
laws  to  the  desired  degree  of  fidelity.  Taken  together,  these  aspects  of  the  numerical 
framework  result  in  the  ability  to  compute  both  smooth  and  weak  solutions  accurately 
and  with  high  fidelity. 


The  Weak-Conscrvation-Law  Form 


Having  introduced  the  term  “strong- conservation-law”  form  of  the  equations,  we 
now  present  a  brief  discussion  of  the  so-called  “weak-conservation-law”  form  for  the 
sake  of  completeness  and  clarification.  The  weak-conservation-law  form  is  derived 


34 


NWCTP7207 


from  Eq.  4.1  by  applying  the  coordinate  transformations 


T  =  t 

Z  =  £(x,y,2,<) 

rj  =  r ](x,y,z,t) 
a  =  a(i,y,2,t) 


(5.1) 


to  obtain 


dq  dq  dq  dq 

g^^(,dl+ri,d^  +  a'a^ 
a/,  a/,  a/, 

+  aT  + 1,1  +  *  1C 

d  }i  dfi  dfi 

+  IT  +  +  1C 

df2  dh  dh 


(5.2) 


While  in  years  past,  this  form  of  the  equations  has  been  subject  of  debate  as  to 
its  use  in  constructing  shock-capturing  methods,  we  ignore  its  significance  (if  any) 
here  because  it  is  a)  unnecessary  (we  do  not  use  coordinate  transformations  for  the 
conservation  laws)  and  b)  it  does  not  directly  lead  to  discrete  conservation. 


We  now  catalog  the  three  sets  of  equations  that  can  be  selected  for  solution  in 
UNIVERSE-series  codes  such  as  UNIVC.  The  corresponding  Riemann  Solvers  are 
presented  in  the  next  section. 


Linear  Wave  Equation 

The  multi-dimensional  form  of  the  linear  wave  equation  for  a  scalar  variable  q 
fits  Eq.  4.1  with 

f\  =  *q,h  -  *>q,fi  =  cq  (5.3) 

where  a,  6,  and  c  are  constants  (usually  =  1). 


35 


NWC  TP  7207 


Inviscid  Burgers*  Equation 


The  multi-dimensional  form  of  the  inviscid  Burgers’  equation  for  a  scalar  variable 
q  fits  Eq.  4.1  with 

/t=c,j,h  =  bqj,/1=ci  (5.4) 

where  a ,  6,  and  c  are  constants  (usually  =  1). 


Euler  Equations 


The  Navier-Stokes  equations  can  be  written  in  three-dimensional  Cartesian  co¬ 
ordinates  using  the  conservation-law  form  notation  as 

d,  d(F,  -  Gi)  .  8(F,  -  G,)  .  d(F,  -  Gj)  „ 

F  + — Tx —  +  — * —  +  — F, - n  (5'5) 

where 


/  c  \ 

/(e  +  p)u\ 

/  (c  +  p)v  \ 

/(e  +  p)w 

p 

pu 

pv 

pw 

pu 

pu2+p 

pvu 

pwu 

pv 

puv 

pv2+p 

pwv 

pw 

1-Fl  = 

pu  w 

b 

ti 

pvw 

$ 

II 

pw2  +  p 

po  1 

puax 

pvoi 

pWO\ 

'  P°  N  / 

\  pUO  / 

\  pVOfi  / 

\  pwas 

In  comparing  the  above  equation  (Eq.  5.5)  with  Eq.  1,  we  see  that  f\  =  (F)  — (?i), 
etc.  The  Euler  equations  can  be  obtained  from  the  above  by  setting  Gj  =  G?  =  Gj  = 
0.  The  Euler  equations  form  a  hyperbolic  set  of  conservation  laws.  For  perfect  gas, 
we  can  express  the  pressure  p  in  terms  of  the  dependent  variables  as 

P  =  (7  “  l)(e  -  F-((PU)2  +  (H*  +  (P™)2))  (5-6) 


36 


NWCTP7207 


The  viscous  terms  are 


and 


fKdx  +  UT„  +  VTZy  +  WTXZ  \ 

0 


Gj  = 


I X  X 

Txy 

Txx 

pD  — 


dz 


pDd~§t 


(  +  UT*v  +  VTvv  +  WT 

0 


G2  = 


Txy 

Tyy 

Tv* 

P^ 


pDa-ff 


Gz  = 


V  r  —  Of 

(  +  txT‘*  +  ur**  + 

I  0 

Txx 
T,z 
Txx 

pD*-t 

pDa- %■ 


) 


_  du  2  .du  dv  dw . 

T”  “  2ftdi  ~  3^  5x  +  ai  +  a7) 

_  cto  2  .du  dv  dw 

r”  '  2fity  ~  z^di  +  dy  +  a7) 

_  du>  2  .du  dv  dw . 

T“  "  2/i  a7  ~  +  Hi  +  aJ* 

,du  dv . 

r*'  =  ',(ai?  +  8l) 

.du  du> 

r"='i(a7+s7) 


dw  dv 

=  'i(aT+a7) 


(5.7a) 


(5.76) 


(5.7c) 


(5.7d) 


37 


NWCTP7207 


The  Navier-Stokes  equations  will  be  utilized  in  Phase  II  and  is  therefore  pre¬ 
sented  here  for  convenience.  The  first  five  equations  in  Eq.  5.5  represent  the  usual 
conservation  laws  for  total  energy  per  unit  volume  (e),  mass  per  unit  volume  (p), 
and  the  three  components  of  momentum  per  unit  volume  (pu,pv,pw).  In  Phase  II, 
when  the  Reynolds-averaged  form  of  the  Navier-Stokes  equations  will  be  used  to  sim¬ 
ulate  turbulent  flows,  the  additional  conservation  equations  will  be  used  to  represent 
turbulent  kinetic  energy,  diffusivity,  etc.,  as  part  of  a  two-equation  turbulence  model. 


Other  Equations 


Since  the  UNIVERS E-series  formulation  is  very  flexible  and  the  software  im¬ 
plementations  very  modular,  other  sets  of  equations  can  easily  be  plugged  in.  Two 
examples  are  1)  the  equations  of  acoustics  and  2)  Maxwell's  equations  of  electro¬ 
magnetics.  The  additional  species  equations  along  with  the  corresponding  source 
terms  can  also  be  used  to  represent  the  chemically  reacting  species  of  a  finite-rate- 
chemistry  computation.  Complex  equations  of  state  may  be  used  to  represent  equilib¬ 
rium  flows.  Eventually,  therefore,  UNIVERSE-series  codes  can  replace  the  USA-series 
of  codes.21-35 


38 


NWCTP7207 


6.0  RIEMANN  SOLVERS 
General  Framework 


The  Riemann  problem  is  an  initial  value  problem  (IVP)  with  piecewise-constant 
initial  data  (one  set  to  the  left  of  the  origin  and  the  other  to  the  right).  It  is  similar 
to  the  “shock  tube  problem”  of  gasdynamics  where  at  t  =  0,  a  diaphragm  separates 
the  left  state  from  the  right.  In  the  shock  tube,  the  bursting  of  the  diaphragm  brings 
the  left  and  right  states  into  contact.  In  the  mathematical  statement  of  the  Riemann 
Problem,  we  assume  that  the  left  and  right  states  are  separated  at  t  =  0  and  at 
t  >  0,  we  let  the  two  states  interact.  In  the  shock-tube  problem,  typically  the  initial 
velocities  are  both  zero.  In  the  Riemann  problem  statement,  we  have  the  freedom 
to  specify  arbitrary  values  for  these.  The  Riemann  problem  can  be  constructed  in 
a  meaningful  way  for  any  set  of  hyperbolic  conservation  laws  while  the  shock-tube 
problen.  related  directly  only  to  the  solution  of  the  Euler  equations. 

“  .liemann  Solver”  is  the  name  given  to  the  procedure  that  constructs  the  solution 
to  the  Riemann  problem.  In  the  one-dimensional  case,  knowing  the  solution  implies 
a  quantitative  and  qualitative  knowlege  of  q(x,t)  for  — oo  <  x  <  +oo  and  t  >  0. 
It  turns  out  (for  the  piecewise-constant  case  under  discussion)  that  the  solution  is 
self-similar  in  the  variable  ( 6  =  x/t.  Therefore  q(x,t )  =  qR(6),  with  the  superscript 
R  denoting  the  solution  to  the  Riemann  problem. 

Jump  Conditions 


We  now  present  some  facts  and  perspectives  regarding  the  solution  of  the  Rie¬ 
mann  problem  in  one  spatial  dimension  corresponding  to  the  one- dimensional  system 
of  conservation  laws  given  by 


dq  df(q)  _  n 

dt*  dx 


(6.1) 


where  q  and  /  are  m-vectors.  If  the  left  and  right  states  are  equal,  we  obtain  the 
degenerate  Riemann  problem  for  which  the  solution  is 


qR(6)  =  qr  =  qt 


(6.2) 


39 


NWC  TP  7207 


where  the  subscripts  r  and  /  refer  to  the  right  and  left  states  respectively.  In  the 
nontrivial  case  of  qr  ^  qi ,  we  begin  (at  t  =  0)  with  discontinuities  in  one  or  more  of  the 
dependent  variables.  Discontinuities  must  satisfy  the  jump  relations  (see  Whitharn20) 

-*  (?]  +  (/(?)]  =  0  •  (6-3) 

The  notation  [•]  denotes  the  jump  (-)r  —  (•)/  where  refers  to  any  quantity.  The 
speed  of  propagation  of  the  discontinuity  is  given  by  x. 

One-Dimensional  Euler  Equations 


Let  us  consider  an  example  case  for  the  one-dimensional  Euler  equations. 

-x  (e]  +  [(e  +  p)u]  =  0 

-z  Ip]  +  (H  =  o  (6.4) 

-x  [pu]  +  [p  +  pu2]  =  0 

If  the  elements  of  qi  are  known,  the  jump  relations  given  above  provide  m  (=  3  for  the 
1-d  Euler  equations)  algebraic  relations  for  m  +  1  unknowns  (the  m  elements  of  qT  and 
x).  Therefore,  we  have  a  one-parameter  family  of  solutions  possible.  For  example, 
if  x  is  chosen  as  the  free  parameter,  the  number  of  equations  matches  the  remaining 
number  of  unknowns.  We  can  also  select  one  of  the  elements  of  qr  or  a  particular 
combination  of  them  as  the  free  parameter.  For  the  Euler  equations,  therefore,  we 
can  select  pr  or  pr  or  ur  as  the  free  parameter;  we  then  use  the  three  jump  relations 
to  solve  for  (x,pr,ur)  or  (x,pr,ur)  or  ( x,pr,pr ),  respectively.  Even  if  the  number 
of  equations  is  sufficient  (once  one  free  parameter  is  chosen),  the  choice  of  the  free 
parameter  must  lead  to  a  solvable  set  of  equations.  For  Ponlinear  equations,  more 
than  one  solution  may  also  be  found.  We  also  observe  that  in  a  similar  fashion,  the 
elements  of  qi  may  be  treated  as  unknowns  and  the  elements  of  qr  as  the  known 
values.  In  fact,  the  sets  of  “knowns”  and  “unknowns”  may  also  be  a  mixed  set  of  left 
and  right  states  as  long  as  there  are  m  known  values,  m  unknown  values  and  a  free 
parameter  and  the  resulting  set  of  equations  for  the  unknowns  are  solvable. 

For  this  example,  let  us  pick  x  =  0.  Then  Eqs.  6.4  reduce  to  a  statement  that 
the  difference  flux  values  corresponding  to  left  and  right  states  is  zero.  Consider  the 
flux  values  given  in  Table  6.1  below  (7  =  1.4). 


40 


NWCTP7207 


-  -  H 

Quantity 

— 

Value 

Energy  Flux  +  pu*/2 

14.9085 

Mass  Flux  pu 

2.36643 

Momentum  Flux  p  +  pu2 

6.6 

Table  6.1  Flux  values  for  1-d  steady  shock 

Two  sets  of  solutions  are  possible  that  satisfy  the  relations  corresponding  to  values 
of  the  fluxes.  These  are  shown  as  “Solution  1”  and  “Solution  2”  in  Table  6.2  below. 


Quantity 

Solution  1 

Solution  2 

pressure  p 

1.0 

4.5 

density  p 

1.0 

2.66667 

velocity  u 

2.36643 

0.88741 

Mach  number  M 

2.0 

0.57735 

Entropy  p/pJ 

1.0 

1.13987 

eigenvalue  (ti  —  c) 

1.18322 

-0.64963 

Table  6.2  Possible  left  and  right  states 

Solution  1  can  either  correspond  to  qi  or  qr  and  so  can  Solution  2.  When  Solution 
1  or  Solution  2  is  selected  to  be  both  qi  and  qr,  we  obtain  the  trivial  case  with  no 
discontinuity.  Solution  1  corresponds  to  supersonic  flow  along  the  positive  x  direction 


41 


NWC  TP  7207 


with  Mi  =  2.0.  Solution  2  corresponds  to  subsonic  flow  along  the  positive  x  direction 
with  M2  =  0.57735.  When  Solution  1  is  taken  to  correspond  to  qi  and  Solution  2 
to  correspond  to  qr  we  have  a  shock-wave  discontinuity.  In  this  case,  we  note  that 
there  is  an  increase  of  entropy  across  the  shock  (when  crossing  over  from  supersonic 
to  subsonic  tide)  and  we  also  note  for  later  use  that  the  eigenvalue  tt  —  c  (c  is  the 
local  speed  of  sound)  transitions  from  a  larger  value  to  a  lesser  value  (in  this  case 
also  from  positive  to  negative  value).  If  we  specify  that  Solution  2  corresponds  to 
qi  and  Solution  1  to  qr,  we  have  a  so-called  “expansion  shock”.  The  flow  suddenly 
expands  from  subsonic  to  supersonic  flow,  entropy  decreases,  and  the  eigenvalue  u  —  c 
increases  (from  negative  value  to  positive  value  in  this  case).  The  expansion  shock 
can  be  ruled  out  as  unphysical  (but  mathematically  permissible)  because  of  entropy 
decrease  across  the  shock  wave.  This  leaves  us  with  the  compressive  shock  wave  as 
the  one  desirable  solution.  A  geometric  “entropy  condition”  will  be  discussed  later  as 
another  means  to  avoid  choosing  expansion  shocks  as  a  possible  solution  component 
for  the  Riemann  problem. 

It  is  left  as  an  exercise  to  the  reader  to  show  that  “contact  discontinuities”  are 
also  solutions  to  Eqs.  6.4. 

i  =  m  =s  ur 

PI  =  Pr  (6.5) 

PI  ^  pr 

Substituting  these  values  into  Eqs.  6.4  will  also  show  the  appropriateness  of  the  term 
“linearly  degenerate"  that  is  often  used  to  describe  the  contact  discontinuity.  Shock 
waves  are  correspondingly  referred  to  as  “genuinely  nonlinear”. 

Linear  Constant-Coefficient  Equations 

Let  us  now  apply  the  jump  relations  to  a  system  of  linear  equations  with  f(q)  = 
Aq,  where  A  is  a  constant  matrix.  The  jump  relations  become 

-iM  +  A(?]=0  (6.6) 

The  similarity  between  the  above  and  the  equation  for  the  eigenvalue  and  eigenvector 
of  A  is  obvious.  Therefore  x  is  an  eigenvalue  of  A  and  [g]  is  proportional  to  the 
corresponding  right  eigenvector. 


42 


NWCTP7207 


Since  Eq.  6.1  is  assumed  to  be  hyperbolic,  df  /dq  =  A  has  m  real  eigenvalues 
(Ai,i  =  and  a  set  of  m  linearly  independent  right  eigenvectors  (r,,i  = 

Each  eigenvalue  corresponds  to  one  choice  of  discontinuity-propagation 
speed  x .  The  jump  in  dependent  variables  across  that  discontinuity  is  proportional 
to  r,  (see  Fig.  6.1).  Let 

(?],  =  <*.»-,  (6.7) 

where  a,  is  a  coefficient  of  proportionality. 

The  transition  from  qi  to  qr  takes  place  across  the  m  discontinuities  (A,  need  not 
all  be  distinct). 


a,r,  -qr-q,  =  Aq  (6.8a) 

m 

or  Ra  =  A  q  (6.8  b) 

where  a  is  the  m-vector  of  coefficients  and  R  is  the  matrix  whose  columns  are  right 
eigenvectors.  We  can  easily  solve  for  a 

a  =  R~lAq  (6.9) 

Hyperbolicity  guarantees  the  existence  of  R~* .  Equation  6.9  can  also  be  written  as 

<*  =  LAq  (6.10) 

where  L  is  the  matrix  whose  rows  are  left  eigenvectors  (taken  in  the  same  order  as 
the  right  vectors  of  R)  normalized  such  that 

LR  =  RL  =  I  (6.11) 


where  /  is  the  identity  matrix. 

Once  again,  just  as  in  the  nonlinear  case,  we  see  that  each  transition  is  a  one- 
parameter  family  of  solutions.  The  most  convenient  parameter  choice  is  o,-.  Of  course, 
an  appropriate  element  of  qri  (using  the  notation  that  there  is  a  qri  and  g/,  for  each 
transition  i)  can  be  used.  The  corresponding  element  of  must  not  be  zero  for 
solvability. 


43 


NWC  TP  7207 


Figure  6.1  Riemann  solver  for  linear  system  of  equations 


44 


NWC  TP  7207 


We  clearly  see  in  the  case  of  linear  systems  of  equations  that  the  transition  from 
qt  to  qr  is  made  up  of  a  sequence  of  constant  states  separated  by  transitions.  The 
m  unknown  free  parameters  are  chosen  in  such  a  fashion  that  the  sum  of  the  m 
transitions  matches  the  total  change  from  qi  to  qr. 

Across  Discontinuities  and  Along  Characteristics 


A  few  words  comparing  the  jump  relations  across  discontinuities  and  invariance 
of  certain  variables  along  characteristics  are  in  order.  First,  we  note  that  for  linear 
equations,  the  characteristic  speeds  and  discontinuity-propagation  rpeeds  are  one  and 
the  same.  Premultiplying  Eq.  6.1  by  1*,  we  see  that 


'•(8-S)- 

(6.12a) 

(6.12  b) 

(6.12c) 

Along  lines  with  x  =  A;, 

da,  da,  _  dx  do,- 

dt  dt  +  dt  dx 

dt  +A,dx  ° 

(6.13) 

This  shows  that  the  variables  a,  are  constant  along  the  characteristics  whose  slope  is 
given  by  x  —  X,  (same  as  the  shock  speed). 


Riemann  Invariants  Along  Characteristics 


The  Qj  are  called  Riemann  invariants.  In  the  linear  case  we  can  clearly  see 
that  since  a,  are  constant  along  the  characteristics  directions  (also  shocks),  if  they 
were  discontinuous  across  these  lines  to  begin  with,  the  left  value  will  be  maintained 
constant  on  the  left  side  of  the  characteristic  (shock)  and  the  right  value  will  be 
maintained  constant  on  the  right  side  of  the  characteristic  (shock).  Therefore  the 


45 


NWC  TP  7207 


initially  present  discontinuities  across  the  characteristic  (shock)  will  be  preserved 
along  these  lines.  For  the  Riemann  problem  associated  with  linear  equations,  no 
continuous  transition  from  qi  to  qr  is  possible. 

Continuous  Transitions 

We  have  now  discussed  the  case  of  nonlinear  jumps  (Eq.  6.3)  and  linear  dis¬ 
continuities  (Eq.  6.6).  In  order  to  complete  the  picture,  we  must  consider  the  case 
of  continuous  transition  for  the  nonlinear  problem.  One  must  consider  this  because 
when  /  =  f(q)  and  df  /dq  =  A(q),  the  eigenvalues  are  functions  of  q  also.  Let  us 
imagine  that  a  change  between  state  g/,  to  qr,  (i.e.  the  t-th  transition)  is  made  up  of 
a  sequence  of  incremental  changes,  with  each  increment  described  by  a  linear  equa¬ 
tion  with  a  local  value  of  constant  coefficient  matrix  A.  This  situation  is  depicted  in 
Fig.  6.2a  in  two  ways.  First,  the  local  jump  (for  the  i-th  transition)  is  shown  in  the 
q  —  x  plane.  The  sequence  of  incremental  changes  are  shown  by  the  indices  0  —  9. 
These  values  are  next  shown  in  a  state  space  diagram  (q  —  a  plane). 

When  the  actual  equations  being  considered  are  linear,  the  local  characteris¬ 
tic  and  discontinuity  speeds  for  each  incremental  state  is  identical.  For  nonlinear 
equations,  the  local  incremental  characteristic  (and  discontinuity)  directions  are  de¬ 
pendent  on  the  local  q.  One  can  have  either  convergent  or  divergent  characteristic 
directions  (Fig.  6.2b)  as  we  sweep  through  the  incremental  states. 

The  case  of  divergent  characteristics  is  shown  on  the  top  figure.  The  charac¬ 
teristics  are  marked  by  the  notation  Aj;  where  i  denotes  the  t-th  transition  and  j 
denotes  the  incremental  transition  between  incremental  states  j  —  1  and  j.  In  the 
case  of  divergent  characteristics,  A,j  is  to  the  left  of  A;g  in  the  x  —  t  plane.  The  local 
incremental  left  and  right  states  corresponding  to  these  incremental  characteristics 
are  also  marked  for  each  characteristic.  This  picture  makes  complete  physical  sense 
and  results  in  the  »-th  transition  being  comprised  of  a  series  of  incremental  and  small 
jumps  which  are  single- valued  in  the  x  —  t  plane. 

When  we  evaluate  A ,($<,)  and  A ,(gr,),  we  may  find  that  they  are  convergent.  If 
we  assume  that  the  t-th  transition  is  continuous  in  this  case,  we  obtain  the  situation 
depicted  in  the  lower  figure  In  Fig.  6.2b.  The  transition  between  incremental  states 


46 


NWCTP  7207 


Divergent  characteristics 


Xi5  xi6 


xi3  w  3\4 


x  = 


SC-2MI-CS 


90  s  9li 


99  =  9^ 


Convergent  characteristics 

Xj5  ^i4 


A  xi2 

2/3  /  >11 


x  =  Xi9, 


9o  =  9ii 


99  =  9rj 


48 


NWC  TP  7207 


0  -  1  is  by  definition  to  take  place  across  the  characteristic  identified  by  Xu.  The 
transition  between  incremental  states  1  —  2  is  to  take  place  across  Aj2 •»  etc.  Looking 
at  the  situation  depicted  in  the  figure,  the  physical  absurdity  of  the  assumption  of 
continuous  incremental  transitions  is  obvious.  Each  of  the  incremental  states  is  to 
be  found  at  two  values  of  x/t  in  the  diagram.  Therefore,  in  order  to  avoid  physically 
absurd  transitions,  the  case  of  convergent  characteristics  must  not  be  associated  with 
continuous  transitions  but  must  be  coupled  to  the  discontinuous  transition  case  that 
has  already  been  discussed  earlier.  However,  a  continuous  transition  for  the  case  of 
convergent  characteristics  can  exist  along  the  negative-t  direction  (the  lower  half  of 
the  x  —  t  plane).  This  indicates  that  convergent  characteristics  result  in  shock  waves. 

One  may  also  consider  a  combination  of  convergent  and  divergent  characteristic 
directions  in  the  same  i-th  transition.  In  the  part  with  the  convergent  characteristics, 
the  solution  will  be  multivalued  and  therefore  we  must  rule  out  this  case.  Later,  we 
will  discuss  the  concept  of  a  geometric  entropy  condition  related  to  this.  Diverging 
characteristics  lead  to  single  valued  transitions  between  incremental  states  and  are 
allowed  to  occur.  Thus  we  see  that  for  genuinely  nonlinear  problems,  continuous 
“rarefactions”  (with  divergent  characteristics)  may  arise. 

Having  said  all  of  the  above  regarding  the  physical  absurdity  of  the  combination 
of  convergent  characteristics  and  smooth  transitions,  we  will  see  later  (during  the  dis¬ 
cussion  of  the  Osher  scheme)  that  we  will  indeed  choose  to  use  such  a  mathematically 
possible  approach  to  define  an  approximate  Riemann  solver.  We  will  leave  the  details 
until  then. 


Let  us  now  consider  the  mathematics  of  continuous  transitions.  By  analogy  with 
the  linear  case  where  Eq.  6.7  was  valid,  we  can  think  of  a,  as  a  running  parameter 
over  the  incremental  changes  in  the  sequence  of  locally  linear  incremental  continuous 
transitions  (in  state  space)  associated  with  the  t'-th  characteristic  field.  Thus 


Across  such  a  continuous  transition, 

r d « ; 

Toia 

=  /  r<(9(a))do 

Jo 


(6.14) 


(6.15) 


49 


NWC  TP  7207 


Once  again  we  see  the  role  of  a,  as  the  free  parameter,  in  this  case  the  running 
parameter  too. 

Riemann  Invariants  Across  Continuous  Transitions 


We  saw  that  in  the  linear  case,  Qj  can  be  shown  to  be  the  Riemann  invariants 
along  characteristics.  In  the  nonlinear  case,  Eqs.  6.12a  and  6.12b  remain  valid  (even 
though  A  =  A(q)  and  not  a  constant  matrix).  However,  the  transition  from  Eq.  6.12b 
to  Eq.  6.12c  is  only  possible  for  linear  equations  and  for  nonlinear  equations,  in 
general,  when  there  are  no  more  than  two  dependent  variables36.  Therefore  the 
existence  of  Riemann  invariants  along  characteristics  is  limited  to  linear  equations 
and,  in  general,  to  a  set  of  two  nonlinear  equations. 


In  contrast  to  the  above,  Riemann  invariants  across  continuous  transitions  exist 
for  the  case  of  any  number  of  nonlinear  systems  of  conservation  laws.  However, 
deriving  them  may  be  very  difficult,  depending  on  the  complexity  of  the  equations. 
We  already  have  seen  in  Eq.  6.14  that  the  change  in  dependent  variables  across  the  i- 
th  (continuous  nonlinear)  transition  (rarefactions)  is  in  the  direction  of  the  local  right 
eigenvector  corresponding  to  the  i-th  eigenvalue  of  the  Jacobian  matrix  A.  Since  the 
set  of  right  eigenvectors  and  left  eigenvectors  is  orthogonal  (Eq.  6.11),  we  see  that 

lj(ft)=°  f°r  ifij  (6*16) 

Therefore  there  are  m  —  1  directions  that  are  orthogonal  to  the  direction  in  state 
space  given  by  r-j .  This  is  always  true  but  here  we  relate  the  orthogonal  directions  to 
the  left  eigenvectors.  Now  let  us  consider  variables  ip  which  is  constructed  to  obey 

Vflt>i'ri(l)  =  0  (6.17) 


Such  variables  can  exist  because  by  inspecting  Eq.  6.16,  we  see  that  the  gradient 
of  ip  can  be  combinations  of  the  left  eigenvectors  that  are  orthogonal  to  r^.  Such 
variables  are  invariant  across  the  transition  in  state  space  (and  across  the  divergent 
characteristics  representing  the  smooth  transition  in  physical  space)  because 


dip* 

da, 


=  •  r,  =  0 


(6.18) 


50 


NWC  TP  7207 


FVom  Eqs.  6.17  and  6.18  we  see  that  for  each  transition,  there  cam  be  only  m  -  1 
Riemann  invariants.  These  m  —  1  invariance  relations  provide  m  —  1  equations  for 
solving  for  m  unknowns  (say  qr)  and  once  again  one  suitable  parameter  must  be 
chosen  to  be  the  free  parameter  for  the  transition.  For  more  details  regarding  Riemann 
invariants  across  transitions  the  reader  is  referred  to  Refs.  15  and  16. 

Complete  Solution  of  Riemann  Problem 


Now  we  are  ready  to  put  together  the  complete  picture  of  the  exact  solution  to 
the  one-dimensional  Riemann  problem.  The  solution  is  made  up  of  piecewise-constant 
states  separated  by  m  transitions  associated  with  the  m  eigenvalues  of  the  Jacobian 
matrix  dffdq.  The  transitions  may  be  continuous  (rarefactions)  or  discontinuous. 
Across  each  discontinuous  transition,  the  jump  relations  (known  as  the  R&nkine- 
Hugoniot  relations  for  the  Euler  equations)  hold.  Each  transition,  irrespective  of 
type,  is  a  one-parameter  transition.  There  are  therefore  m  unknown  parameters. 
These  m  values  must  be  chosen  so  that  the  sum  of  the  corresponding  transitions  adds 
up  to  the  total  change  qr  —  qi- 

When  all  the  transitions  are  known,  the  various  discontinuity  speeds  and  the 
smallest  and  largest  characteristic  speeds  associated  with  each  continuous  transition 
are  known.  Knowing  these  one  can,  in  particular,  determine  what  the  dependent 
variables  are  along  the  line  x  =  0.  We  denote  this  solution  as  qR 

Expansion  Shocks  and  Geometric  Entropy  Condition 

We  saw  in  the  earlier  example  with  the  one-dimensional  Euler  equations  that 
among  the  multiple  solutions  that  satisfy  the  R&nkine-Hugoniot  relations,  one  corre¬ 
sponds  to  an  expansion  shock.  Across  such  a  discontinuity, 


A.(g„)  <  .  (6.19) 

In  the  case  shown  in  Tables  6.1  said  6.2,  the  eigenvalue  considered  is  (u  —  c).  Across 
such  an  expansion  shock,  the  entropy  decreases.  For  the  physically  correct  shock 


51 


NWC  TP  7207 


wave,  the  entropy  should  increase  and  for  the  example  being  considered  we  also  see 
that 

A .(?i,)  >  A ,(qri)  .  (6.20) 

We  also  saw,  in  our  discussion  of  continuous  transitions,  that  the  asf'.mption  of 
continuous  transition  with  single-valued  solutions  over  the  transition  is  inconsistent 
with  A /  >  Ar  (overturned  characteristics  arise).  While  the  “entropy” -based  method 
of  ruling  out  expansion  shocks  is  possible  for  the  Euler  equations  where  a  physical 
entropy  variable  is  available,  the  geometric  condition  for  selection  of  discontinuous 
or  continuous  transitions  is  useful  for  all  hyperbolic  systems  of  conservation  laws. 
This  geometric  “entropy  condition”  may  be  stated  as  follows.  For  the  t-th  transition, 
select  discontinuity  relations  if  A,(g/,)  >  A,(grJ  and  select  the  continuous  transition 
otherwise. 


Integral  Form  for  1-D  Conservation  Laws 


We  now  specialize  the  general  multidimensional  formulation  of  Section  4  to  the 
case  of  one-dimensional  conservation  laws  in  order  to  help  the  reader  see  many  al¬ 
gorithmic  aspects  come  together  without  the  added  complexity  of  multidimensional 
geometry  formulation. 


Beginning  with  Eq.  6.1  and  integrating  with  respect  to  x  and  t,  we  obtain 


+  /(?)*)<**<*<  =  0 

L{lq'd,)dx+J,U,f-dz)d,=° 


(«7+‘  -  £)  A!  +  (tf+  At  =  0 

where  tn,  f"+1  and  Xj+J/2,  xj-\/2  define  the  limits  of  integration, 


1 

qdz 


is  the  cell  average  of  the  dependent  variables  and 


fj±l/2  ~  ~£l  Jtn 


(6.21) 


(6.22) 

(6.23) 


(6.24a) 


(6.246) 


NWCTP7207 


is  the  average  flux  along  cell  boundaries  over  an  interval  of  time. 

Equation  6.23  is  the  fully  discrete  integral  form  of  the  1-d  system  of  conservation 
laws  presented  as  Eq.  6.1  and  can  also  be  written  as 


-n+l  -n  fn  _  f n 

~  gj  ,  J;+l/2  Jj-1/2  __ 

At  Az 


(6.25) 


Even  though  Eq.  6.25  resembles  a  finite-difference  formula,  it  must  be  noted  that  it 
is  an  exact  relation  that  must  be  satisfied  by  any  exact  solution  of  the  differential 
equations.  The  integral  form  of  the  equations  does  not  demand  the  existence  of 
derivatives  but  only  weaker  conditions  of  integrability  and  solutions  of  Eq.  6.25  can 
also  therefore  include  “weak  solutions.” 


The  semi-discrete  version  of  Eq.  6.25  can  be  written  as 

dq  fj+i/2  -  f  j—i/2  _  Q 


(6.26) 


and  can  either  be  obtained  by  integrating  Eq.  6.1  only  with  respect  to  x  or  by  taking 

«• 

the  limit  At  — »  0  in  Eq.  6.25.  In  Eq.  6.26,  fj±i/2  is  the  flux  at  cell  boundary  zJ±1/2- 


We  observed  in  the  last  subsection  that  Eq.  6.23  resembled  a  finite-difference 
formula  that  may  be  used  to  advance  the  cell  averages  q  from  one  time  level  to  the 
next  if  the  cell  boundary  (face)  values  of  the  fluxes  can  be  defined.  The  key  is  being 
able  to  obtain  the  cell  face  values  of  the  flux  from  known  values  of  q.  This  may  be 
accomplished  using  piecewise  polynomial  interpolation  (known  as  reconstruction)  as 
explained  in  Section  4. 

Consider  the  initial  value  problem  for  Eq.  6.23  defined  by  adding  to  that  equation 
the  initial  conditions  qfij  =  1,- •  * ,  J.  Then,  a  numerical  algorithm  to  solve  Eq.  6.23 
may  be  defined  as  follows: 

a)  Interpolate  qj  to  obtain  piecewise  polynomial  pointwise  behavior  of  q  within  each 
cell. 


53 


NWC  TP  7207 


b)  Each  polynomial  (within  each  cell)  may  be  evaluated  at  Xj±\/2  for  that  cell. 
Collecting  all  such  values,  we  find  that  we  have,  at  each  cell  face,  left  and  right 
values  (qL,qn)j+ 1/2- 

c)  Resolve  the  discontinuity  at  each  cell  face  using  solutions  to  the  Riemann  prob¬ 
lem.  (The  solution  procedure  is  usually  referred  to  as  the  Riemann  Solver.)  This 
will  result  in  a  knowledge  of  fj+i/2  which  we  shall  henceforth  call  the  numerical 
flux. 

d)  Substitute  fj±i/i  into  Eq.  6.23  to  advance  the  solution  to  the  next  time  level. 
Proceed  to  step  (a)  and  repeat. 

Notes: 

1)  In  step  (a),  we  must  construct  piecewise  polynomials  that  match  the  given  cell 
averages.  This  is  different  from  the  usual  interpolation  of  discrete  pointwise 
values.  There  are  at  least  three  different  ways  of  performing  such  interpolation 
in  order  to  reconstruct  the  pointwise  behavior  of  the  original  dependent  variables 
in  each  cell  —  i)  reconstruction  by  deconvolution  (RD),  ii)  reconstruction  using 
the  primitive  function  formulation  (RP),  and  iii)  reconstruction  by  matching  cell 
averages  directly  (RM).  The  reconstruction  procedure  outlined  in  Section  4  of 
this  report  is  based  on  (RM).  A  discussion  of  (RD)  and  (RP)  can  be  found  in 
Reference  3  and  papers  cited  therein. 

2)  One  may  wonder  why  piecewise  polynomials  should  be  used,  especially  when  one 
sees  in  step  (b)  that  this  will  lead  to  discontinous  behavior  at  cell  interfaces.  In 
fact,  the  choice  of  piecewise  polynomials  is  particularly  apt  for  just  that  reason. 
After  all,  we  must  allow  our  interpolation  model  to  permit  discontinuities  since 
our  goal  is  to  be  able  to  compute  “weak”  solutions.  It  is  true,  however,  that  with 
piecewise  polynomials  of  the  type  described  in  this  report,  the  approximation 
always  pushes  any  discontinuity  to  be  at  the  cell  interfaces.  Further  refinements 
have  already  been  devised  to  enable  discontinuities  to  be  located  even  within  the 
cell  (“subcell  resolution”  —  Ref.  37)  but  it  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  report  to 
delve  into  such  advances. 

3)  When  dealing  with  systems  of  equations,  questions  arise  regarding  the  choice  of 
variables  to  interpolate:  should  the  reconstruction  i  echniques  be  based  on  match- 


54 


NWC  TP  7207 


ing  the  basic  conservation  variables’  averages,  “primitive”  variables’,  “character¬ 
istic”  variables’,  etc.?  These  issues  tire  not  considered  in  this  report  but  are 
covered  in  Refs.  3  and  4. 

4)  In  the  case  of  interpolation  with  piecewise- constant  polynomials,  if  we  consider 
two  neighboring  cells,  we  have  two  sets  of  constant  values,  one  to  the  left  of 
and  one  to  the  right  of  each  cell  interface.  This  resembles  the  classical  Riemann 
problem.  When  higher  degree  polynomials  are  chosen,  the  left  and  right  states 
are  not  constant  but  a  Riemann  Solver  may  still  be  used  to  construct  the  solution 
at  the  instant  of  initial  contact  between  the  discontinuities.  More  sophisticated 
Riemann  Solvers  may  also  be  sought  —  those  that  resolve  piecewise  linear  left 
and  right  state  variations,  etc.  In  this  report,  the  semi-discrete  formulation  is 
utilized  to  construct  higher-order  time-accurate  schemes.  It  may  be  observed  by 
looking  at  Eq.  6.26  that  if  we  use  a  method-of-lines  approach  and  embed  the 
semi-discrete  form  in  a  Runge-Kutta  time-integration  scheme,  for  example,  then 
only  the  pointwise  values  of  the  cell  interface  fluxes  are  required.  These  can  be 
obtained  using  a  Riemann  Solver  based  on  local  values  of  left  and  right  states. 

5)  Going  back  to  Note  2,  we  can  also  add  that  for  smooth  data,  the  magnitude  of 
the  difference  between  qi  and  qr  behaves  with  0(  Azr+1)  where  r  is  the  degree 
of  the  interpolating  polynomial.  Thus,  the  piecewise  polynomial  approach  is 
appropriate  for  obtaining  both  smooth  solutions  and  solutions  with  discontinu¬ 
ities.  For  smooth  solutions,  the  need  for  using  “good”  Riemann  Solvers  becomes 
decreasingly  important  with  increasing  degree  of  polynomial  approximation. 

6)  The  procedure  for  multidimensional  flows  is  similar  to  that  for  one-dimensional 
problems.  Interpolation  in  step  (a)  must  be  carried  out  in  a  suitable  multidimen¬ 
sional  way.  We  saw  in  Section  4  that  the  boundary  integration  of  Eq.  4.22  can 
be  replaced  by  a  suitable  quadrature.  At  each  quadrature  point  there  are  two 
sets  of  values  of  the  dependent  variables,  one  set  from  the  left  cell  and  the  other 
set  from  the  right  cell  (or  the  inside  and  outside  cells  as  the  perspective  may 
be).  If  we  have  used  piecewise-constant  interpolation,  we  have  a  local  Riemann 
problem  (piecewise-constant  states  extending  to  a  finite  distance  away  from  the 
discontinuity  placed  at  the  cell  face)  in  the  direction  of  the  local  normal  to  the 
common  cell  face.  With  higher-degree  interpolation,  the  remarks  of  Note  4  can 


55 


NWC  TP  7207 


be  brought  to  bear:  for  an  instant  of  time  just  after  the  left  and  right  states 
are  allowed  to  interact,  the  solution  to  the  one-dimensional  Riemann  problem 
(along  the  direction  that  is  normal  to  the  cell  face)  is  applicable.  Therefore  the 
need  for  a  multidimensional  Riemann  Solver  and  a  Riemann  Solver  that  can  deal 
with  non-piecewise-constant  left  and  right  states  can  be  obviated  by  exploiting  a 
suitable  combination  of  several  pointwise  (in  time  and  space)  Riemann  problems. 

We  now  use  a  set  of  figures  to  help  visualize  the  above  concepts.  Figure  6.3 
simply  outlines  the  integration  limits  for  the  1-d  integral  form.  Figure  6.4  shows  how 
an  initial  value  problem  (IVP)  for  Eq.  6.1  can  be  replaced  by  the  corresponding  one 
for  cell  averages  given  by  Eq.  6.25.  Assuming  that  piecewise  constant  reconstruction 
was  used,  Figure  6.5  zooms  in  on  one  local  Riemann  problem  (IVP  with  piecewise 
constant  states)  and  Figure  6.6  helps  visualize  how  the  individual  Riemann  problems, 
taken  together,  provide  the  means  to  update  the  cell  averages  to  the  next  time  level. 
Figure  6.7  shows  the  use  of  piecewise-constant  and  piecewise-linear  interpolation  in 
one  spatial  dimension. 


Using  the  Riemann  Solver 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  exact  solution  to  the  Riemann  problem  is  made 
up  of  piecewise  constant  states  separated  by  transitions.  Each  transition  is  associated 
with  an  eigenvalue  of  the  Jacobian  matrix.  For  the  1-d  Euler  equations,  there  are 
three  eigenvalues  u  —  c,  u  and  u  +  c,  where  c  is  the  speed  of  sound  (c  =  y/y p/p). 
The  transitions  associated  with  u  ±  c  can  either  be  a  shock  wave  or  a  rarefaction  and 
that  associated  with  u  is  called  a  contact  discontinuity.  The  following  section  on  the 
Godunov  scheme  provides  formulae  for  the  construction  of  the  exact  solution.  In  par¬ 
ticular,  this  provides  the  extents  of  the  piecewise  constant  states  and  the  magnitudes 
of  the  transitions.  From  this  information,  the  value  of  q  along  the  ray  6  =  0  may  be 
determined.  We  denote  this  by  qR  and  the  corresponding  flux  a s  fR  =  f(qR). 

Consider  now  Eq.  6.26  and  the  steps  (a)-(d)  of  the  solution  procedure  given  in  the 
previous  subsection.  We  assume  piecewise  constant  behavior  of  dependent  variables 

q(x)  =  qj,  1/2  <  x  <  Xj+i/2  (6.27) 


56 


nAt 


j-1/2  j+1/2 


Figure  6.3  1-d  integration 


Ml 


NWCTP7207 


RIEMANN  SOLVER 


fR=FLUXAT-X]+1/2it=0+e 

f  IS  OBTAINED  BY  USING 
A  KNOWLEDGE  OF  DECOMPOSITION 
OF  INITIAL  DISCONTINUITIES 


Figure  6.5  Ri  era  arm  Solver 


NWC  TP  7207 


USING  RIEMANN  SOLVER 


*  a  A 

~  n+1  —  n  f  .  _  f 

Q  -  P  +  j-fl/2  j-1/2  =  0 

At  Ax 


WE  DEFINE  f  =  f  RIEMANN 


qRIEMANN, 


Figure  6.6  Using  Riemann  problem  solutions 


60 


NWCTP7207 


\  •  /  \  *  ✓  \  <  /  \  •  /  \  >  /  \  >  /  \  i  /  \  i 

V.  I'  \  I  s  \  I  s  '  1/  \l  /  ^  l  S  v  I  * 


PIECEWISE  LINEAR  INTERPOLATION 


Figure  6.7  Piecewise  constant  and  linear  interpolations 


61 


NWCTP7207 


This  results  in  local  Riemann  problems  which  can  be  solved  to  construct 

W  =  /*♦!/>  (6  28) 

These  numerical  fluxes  can  be  substituted  into  Eq.  6.26  along  with  a  suitable  time¬ 
stepping  procedure  to  advance  qj. 

Since  for  hyperbolic  systems  it  takes  finite  time  for  spatially  separated  locations 
to  influence  each  other,  for  a  sufficiently  small  time  step,  the  Riemann  problem  from 
xj-\/2  wiH  not  affect  the  solution  to  the  Riemann  problem  at  x>+i/2  and  vice-versa. 
We  call  such  a  time  step  as  A tcFL  with  the  subscript  referring  to  the  Courant- 
Friedrichs-Lewy  stability  limit  for  linear  equations. 

For  A t  <  A tcFL>  fj+i/7  =  />+ 1/2  (6.29) 

and  therefore  the  fully  discrete  form,  Eq.  6.25  may  also  be  used  to  advance  the  solution 

We  must  note  that,  when  there  are  source  terms  in  1-d,  for  higher-order  poly¬ 
nomial  interpolation,  and  for  multidimensional  problems,  it  is  still  true  that  two 
spatially  separated  Riemann  problems  will  not  influence  each  other  for  a  sufficiently 
small  interval  of  time.  However,  each  Riemann  problem  solution  is  no  longer  self 
similar  under  these  circumstances  and  therefore  Eq.  6.29  is  not  true.  In  such  cases, 
it  is  convenient  to  resort  to  the  method  of  lines  (semi-discrete)  approach. 

We  now  illustrate  three  properties: 

1)  Discretization  methods  such  as  those  described  in  this  section  (which  use  a  Rie¬ 
mann  Solver)  are  “upwind”  schemes. 

2)  Methods  based  on  piecewise  constant  interpolation  are  only  first-order  accurate. 

3)  First-order  accurate  upwind  schemes  are  monotonocity  preserving. 

When  a  Riemann  flux  is  used  as  the  cell  interface  flux,  the  fully  discrete  integral 
form  defined  in  Eq.  6.25  becomes 

«7+1  =  (6-30) 


62 


NWC  TP  7207 


where  fj+1/2  =  ff+i/2-  Adding  and  subtracting  fj  from  the  second  term  on  the  right 
hand  side  (RHS),  we  can  rewrite  that  term  to  be 

/>+ 1/2  -  f 7—1/2  =  (/j+1/2  _  />)  +  (/j  ~  fj- 1/2)  (6.31) 

The  term  fj+1/2  ~  fj  includes  the  effect  of  all  left-moving  waves  from  the  right.  The 
term  fj  —  fj-\/2  includes  the  effect  of  all  right-moving  waves  from  the  left.  Therefore, 
Eq.  6.30  describes  a  method  of  updating  qj  that  accounts  for  the  appropriate  signal 
propagation  effects,  and  hence  describes  an  “upwind”  scheme. 

We  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  show  that  when  a  >  0  for  the  one-dimensional  version 
of  the  linear  wave  equation  corresponding  to  Eq.  5.3, 

fj+1/2  =  /j-1/2  =  ««j-i  (6.32) 

and  therefore,  we  obtain 

(6-33) 

Once  again,  we  see  that  the  numerical  algorithm  defined  using  piecewise  constant 
polynomials  and  a  Riemann  Solver  results  in  an  “upwind”  scheme. 

For  piecewise  constant  and  piecewise  linear  polynomial  approximations,  the  value 
of  the  cell  average  is  also  the  point  wise  value  at  the  midpoint  of  each  cell.  Thus, 
rewriting  Eq.  6.33  as 

(6.34) 

where  v  —  a  At/  Ax,  we  see  that 

u"+1  =  (1  -  i/)u?  +  vunj_x  (6.35) 

and  therefore  the  method  is  monotonicity  preserving  for  the  linear  wave  equation  as 
long  as  v  <  1.  It  is  clear  that  the  values  u"*1  will  be  bounded  by  the  maxima  and 
minima  of  ti",  and  if  the  u"  described  a  monotone  profile,  then  u"+1  will  preserve 
such  monotonicity.  A  Taylor-series  analysis  of  Eq.  6.34  will  also  show  that  the  finite- 
difference  scheme  is  first-order  accurate. 


63 


NWC  TP  7207 


As  motivation  for  the  following  sections,  we  look  at  Eq.  6.35  from  the  following 
perspective.  For  the  linear  wave  equation,  the  solution  ti"+1  should  be  equal  to  the 
solution  at  t  =  tn  at  the  foot  of  the  characteristic  drawn  backwards  from 
The  R*iS  of  Eq.  6.35  is  equal  to  that  value  computed  using  linear  interpolation  of  the 
discrete  values  u"  and  u"_j. 

We  now  describe  some  generalizations  that  we  can  use  as  framework  for  describ¬ 
ing  many  schemes  including  those  that  are  based  on  “approximate”  Riemann  Solvers 
or  even  those  that  are  not  based  on  Riemann  Solvers  at  all.  Extending  the  second 
term  on  the  RHS  of  Eq.  6.30  even  further  along  the  lines  shown  in  Eq.  6.31, 


/>+ 1/2  = 


/(gr)j-n/ 2  -I-  /(gf)j+ 1/2 
2 


(/(gr)>+ 1/2  ~  fj+1/2)  ~  (fj+ 1/2  ~  /(?*)>+!/ 2) 

2 


(6.36) 

Note  the  use  of  superscript  R  to  denote  the  Riemann  problem  solution  and  the  sub¬ 
scripts  r  and  /  to  denote  right  and  left  states.  This  can  be  rewritten,  after  dropping 
the  subscript  j  -I-  1/2,  as 


*2  2  (6.3  <) 

where  the  terms  with  the  +  and  —  superscripts  represent  the  net  flux  difference 
across  various  discontinuities  and  continuous  transitions  grouped  by  “positive”  and 
“negative”  directions,  respectively.  It  is  shown  in  Ref.  13  how  this  form  can  be  used 
to  represent  methods  using  Osher’s  or  Roe’s  approximate  Riemann  Solvers  in  addition 
to  that  using  the  exact  Riemann  Solver  described  earlier  in  this  section  (also  known 
as  the  Godunov  scheme).  In  fact,  Eq.  6.37  can  be  used  to  represent  even  Split-Flux 
schemes  as  well  as  schemes  that  do  not  use  Riemann  Solvers  at  all.  For  example, 


t  /(gr)  +  f(qi)  _  ,(gr  -qi) 

J  2  9  2 


(6.38) 


where  <f>  can  be  a  positive  constant  following  the  Lax-FViedrichs  scheme  or  computed 
as  the  absolute  value  of  the  maximum  local  eigenvalue  in  the  manner  of  the  Ru¬ 
sanov  scheme.  We  have  already  observed  that  such  simpler  approaches  become  quite 
useful  with  higher  degree  polynomial  interpolation.  These  ideas  will  be  revisited  in 
somewhat  more  detail  below. 


64 


NWCTP7207 


Operational  Unification 

At  the  surface,  the  Riemann  problem  and  its  solution  may  seem  to  be  limited  in 
its  applicability  to  one-dimensional  problems  with  piecewise  constant  states.  In  fact, 
the  one-dimensional  Riemann  Solver  can  be  applied  effectively  to  multidimensional 
problems  as  well  as  higher-order  polynomial  interpolation.  In  the  earlier  subsection  on 
“One-Dimensional  Numerical  Methods,”  Note  4  dealt  with  the  usefulness  of  the  Rie¬ 
mann  Solver  when  piecewise- linear  and  higher-degree  interpolation  (reconstruction) 
polynomials  are  used.  Note  6  commented  about  multidimensional  problems. 

The  previous  subsection  discussed  how  the  one-dimensional  Riemann  solver  is 
coupled  to  the  one-dimensional  integral  law  form  of  the  equations  to  result  in  a 
numerical  method.  In  this  subsection,  we  first  outline  the  framework  of  how  one¬ 
dimensional  Riemann  Solvers  may  be  applied  in  the  direction  normal  to  a  multidi¬ 
mensional  cell  face.  Next  we  develop  an  operational  unification  that  will  allow  us  to 
present  the  exact  Riemann  Solver  along  with  approximate  Riemann  Solvers  (Osher, 
Roe,  Harten-Lax)  and  even  the  Rusanov  and  Lax-FViedrichs  schemes  (which  have 
little  to  no  significance  as  a  Riemann  Solver)  within  the  same  algebraic  framework. 
This  type  of  unification  was  first  presented  in  Ref.  13.  In  the  following  subsections, 
we  provide  the  appropriate  algebraic  details  for  all  these  schemes. 

In  previous  subsections  we  used  the  subscripts  l  and  r  to  define  the  left  and 
right  initial  states  of  the  Riemann  problem  and  used  /,  and  r,  to  define  the  local 
left  and  right  states  corresponding  to  the  i-th  transition.  In  this  and  subsequent 
subsections,  it  is  more  convenient  to  adopt  a  slightly  different  (but  equally  clear,  we 
hope)  nomenclature  that  will  be  explained  along  the  way. 

As  before,  let  qR  be  the  exact  solution  to  the  local  Riemann  problem  at  a  given 
cell-face  quadrature  point  (these  points  were  introduced  in  Section  4).  We  define  the 
corrsponding  flux  (see  Eq.  4.20)  that  includes  the  effect  of  the  cell-face  normal  and 
surface  area  to  be 

Fr  as  F(qR)  -nS  (6.39) 

where  n  is  the  local  unit  outward-pointing  normal,  S  includes  that  fraction  of  the 
cell-face  area  that  can  be  attributed  to  the  quadrature  point  based  on  its  assigned 


65 


NWC  TP  7207 


“weight”,  and  F  is  the  vector  flux  (Eq.  4.5).  In  a  similar  fashion,  let  us  define 


F  =  F(q)  ■  n  S 

Ft  =  F(qi)  ■  h  S 

Ft  =  F(qr)  ■  h  S 

F->  =  F(qj)  ■  n  S 

(6.40a) 

(6.406) 

(6.40c) 

(6.40d) 

where  “?”  stands  for  any  subscript. 

Let  us  define  d.F+  as  the  change  in  flux  F  across  that  part  of  the  i*th  transition 
that  spans  the  positive  part  of  the  n  —  t  plane  (like  the  x  —  t  plane  in  one  spatial 
dimension).  Similarly,  dF~  is  the  change  in  flux  F  across  that  part  of  the  t-th 
transition  that  spans  the  negative  part  of  the  h  —  t  plane.  We  note  here  that  dF+  =  0 
over  a  transition  for  which  all  relevant  wave  speeds  are  negative,  and  vice-versa.  For 
a  transition  having  both  positive  and  negative  wave  speeds,  both  dF+  and  dF~  may 
be  nonzero. 

Let  us  also  define 

Aq  =  qr-  q, 

(6.41a) 

AF+  =J2dF+ 

t=l 

(6.416) 

m 

A  F-=Y,dF'~ 

is] 

|AF|  =  AF+  -  AF" 

(6.41c) 

(6.4  Id) 

We  can  then  define 

FR  =  F(qR)  . 

(6.42) 

If  we  move  to  qR  from  qi,  we  can  write 

=*■(?.) +£>*•-  • 
i=3 

(6.43) 

66 


NWC  IT  7207 


If  we  approach  qR  from  qr,  we  can  write 

m 

FR  =  F(,r)-'£dF*  .  (6  44) 

1=1 


Taking  the  average  of  Eq.  6.43  and  Eq.  6.44,  we  get 


\i=l  1=1  / 

(6.45) 

This  can  be  rewritten  as 

Fr  =  —  \  (A F+  -  AF~) 

£  £ 

(6.46a) 

or 

F*  =  (-~r)-  -  \  |AF| 

(6.466) 

The  exact  Riemann  iolver  can  be  expressed  in  all  of  the  above  forms.  The 
approximate  Riemanr  Solvers  will  only  be  expressible  in  the  form  of  Eq.  6.43  to 
Eq.  6.46.  The  Rusano  v  ;  .d  Lax-Friedrichs  schemes  will  fit  a  modified  form  of  Eq.  6.46 
where  the  |  AF|  is  replaced  by  <f>  Aq. 

We  now  define  some  nomenclature  that  will  be  handy  in  what  follows.  Let 
be  the  direction  cosines  of  the  cell-face  unit  normal.  Let  us  define 

n,  =  hx  S 

n9  =  h9  S  (6.47a) 

n,  =  n,  S 

where  5  is  defined  in  Eq.  6.39,  and 

nt  =  -(n,i  +  hpy  +  n,i) 

(6.476) 

n«  =  -{nxi  -f  n9y  +  nxz) 

We  also  note  here  that  the  eigenvalues  and  characteristic  speeds  that  arise  as  a 
natural  part  of  the  various  Riemann  solvers  to  be  be  presented  below  are  useful  in 
computing  allowable  time  steps  for  explicit  time-stepping  schemes. 


67 


NWC  TP  7207 


Linear  Wave  Equation 


The  linear  wave  equation  in  three  dimensions  was  defined  in  Eq.  5.3.  Defining 
the  characteristic  speed 

U  =  n,  +  anx  +  bny  4-  cn2,  (6.48) 


the  exact  Riemann  Solver  is  given  by 


qR  =  qi  if  U  >  0 
qR  =  qr  if  U  <  0 


(6.49) 


Inviscid  Burgers1  Equation 


The  inviscid  form  of  Burgers’  equation  was  defined  in  Eq.  5.4.  We  first  define 


C  =  nt  +  ant  +  bnv  +  cn:, 

followed  by  the  characteristic  velocities 

Ui  -  Cq, 

Ur  —  Cqr 

Next  we  note  that  for  the  one-dimensional  inviscid  Burgers’  equation 

gu  .  a»V2  „ 

dt  dx 

the  characteristic  speed  is  u  and  the  shock  speed  (assuming  u/  >  ur)  is 

i«=(uj  +  ur)/2  . 


(6.50) 


(6.51) 


(6.52) 


(6.53) 


If  ui  <  ur  a  rarefaction  fan  is  assumed.  Extending  these  ideas  to  the  Riemann  problem 
associated  with  the  cell-face  normal  direction  of  the  multidimensional  problem  we  can 
define  the  exact  Riemann  Solver  as  follows. 


if  Ui  >  Ur,  compute 
U,  =  (U,  +  Ur)/2 
Fr  =  U,q,/2  if  U,  >  0 
FR  =  Urqrl2  if  17.  <0 


(6.54) 


68 


NWC  TP  7207 


if  Ut  <  Ur,  compute 
Fr  =  0  if  Ui  <  0  and  Ur  >  0 

(6.55) 

Fr  =  Urqr/ 2  if  U/  <  0  and  £/r  <  0 
FR  =  17/91  /2  if  £7/  >  0 

Euler  Equations 


For  the  Euler  equations  (Eq.  5.5),  the  three  distinct  eigenvalues  are  proportional 
(by  a  factor  S,  see  Eq.  6.39)  to  U  —  c,  U ,  U  +  c  where 

1/  =  nt  +  u  nt  4-  t/n„  +  wht  (6.56) 

a 

The  eigenvalue  U  =  US  =  nt  +  unt  +  vnv  +  wnz  is  repeated  thrice  when  there  are 
no  extra  equations  for  a  (see  Eq.  5.5)  and  is  repeated  3  +  N  times  when  there  are  N 
equations  for  a.  In  this  report,  we  only  consider  the  case  N  =  0.  and 

Godunov  Scheme 

The  Riemann  Problem  is  an  initial  value  problem  with  piecewise-constant  initial 
data.  For  the  Godunov  scheme14,  the  exact  solution  of  the  Riemann  Problem  is 
utilized.  The  exact  solution  is  made  up  of  constant  states  separated  by  transitions 
in  the  values  of  the  dependent  variables  across  each  family  of  waves.  The  wave 
transitions  can  be  of  three  types:  1)  continuous  transition  across  rarefaction  fans,  2) 
abrupt  nonlinear  jumps  across  shock  waves,  and  3)  linearly  degenerate  jumps  across 
contact  surfaces. 

Let  us  consider  the  entire  transition  between  qi  and  qr  (Fig.  6.8).  We  write  the 
four  constant  states  separating  the  three  wave  families  as  qo,  qu  92 ,  *nd  93  where 
90  =  9/  and  93  =  qr.  If  pi  >  Po,  the  (U  -  c)  wave  is  a  shock.  If  P2  >  Pa,  the  U  +  c 
family  is  a  shock  transition.  Otherwise,  these  are  rarefaction  fans. 


69 


NWC  TP  7207 


SC-2382-CS 


t 


Figure  6.8  Example  Riemann  problem  solution  for  1-d  Euler  equations 


70 


NWCTP7207 


The  following  relationships  are  valid  across  the  three  types  of  wave  transitions: 
RAREFACTION  —  (U  ±c)  eigenvalues;  i  =  1,3 


PH  I  Pi]  =  Pri/Pr] 

Uli  T  2C/i/(7  -  1)  =  Uri  T  2crf/(7  -  1) 


(6.57) 


SHOCK  WAVE  —  Case  1:  pi,  >  pri;  (U  +  c)  eigenvalue;  i  =  3 


(a 

PH  (7+1) 

Pr,  (7-1) +  2 /(M*)ri 

(*^«),  =  +  Cri(A/j)r,- 

Uri  ~  K),  =  PH_ 

Uli-{ht)i  Pri 

SHOCK  WAVE  —  Case  t:  pri  >  pn;  (U  —  c)  eigenvalue;  i  =  1 


(6.58a) 


M)'i 

Eli 

PH 


(7+1) 

(7-1) +  2 /(*?),,. 


(n«)i  =Ur-  CriM,)^ 


Uli  -Mj  _  pri^ 
Uri  ~  (**«),  P*» 


CONTACT  DISCONTINUITY;  (U )  eigenvalue;  i  =  2 


(6.586) 


Pi,  =  Pri 

a.  a 

I/l,  =  Uri 


(6.59) 


In  the  above,  we  have  used  subscripts  li  and  r*  to  mean  the  constant  states  to  the  left 
and  right  of  the  i-th  wave  transition  being  considered.  For  example,  when  the  first 


71 


NWC  TP  7207 


wave  is  being  considered,  /<  =  0  and  r,  =  1.  The  quantity  is  the  Mach  number 

based  on  a)  the  velocity  corresponding  to  the  left  state  but  measured  with  respect 
to  the  moving  shock  wave,  and  b)  the  speed  of  sound  corresponding  to  the  pressure 
and  density  of  the  left  state.  The  quantity  (M,)r-  is  the  counterpart  corresponding 
to  the  right  state.  The  associated  shock  speeds  have  been  denoted  by  (n,)-. 

_ 

In  the  above,  the  quantities  pip1  and  U  ¥  rryc  8X6  Riemann  Invariants  across 

A,  ' 

the  rarefactions  identified  by  the  eigenvalues  U  ±  c.  Across  the  contact  discontinuity, 
p  and  U  are  Riemann  Invariants. 

It  is  clear  that  there  are  two  equations  per  wave  family  —  a  toted  of  six  equations. 

A  A 

The  unknowns  are  (p,p,U)\  and  (p,p,U) 2  —  also  six  in  number.  The  six  equations 
are  sufficient  to  evaluate  these  six  unknowns.  We  must  augment  these  equations  with 
information  needed  to  compute  the  Cartesian  velocity  components.  The  quantity  U 
is  the  component  of  velocity  along  the  direction  of  the  normal  to  the  cell  face  at  the 
quadrature  point  of  interest.  The  tangential  component  of  velocity  remains  invariant 
across  rarefaction  fans  and  shock  waves.  This  leads  to 


=  u0  +  (Ui  -  U o)nr 

-A 

Vj  =  Uo  +  ( u  1  —  U  o)Hy 

A  A 

ti>i  =  w0  +  (Ui  -  Uo)hx 


(6.60) 


ti2  =  u3  +  ( U2  ~  U 3)nr 
V2  =  V3  +  (U2  ~U a)nr 

A 

U>2  =  W3  +  (U2  ~  U3)flM 


(6.61) 


One  way  of  utilizing  the  exact  solution,  given  above,  to  the  Riemann  problem  is 
given  below.  Given  the  initial  data  qo  =  qi  and  93  =  qr,  first  compute  the  intermediate 
states  given  by  q  1  and  92  in  each  interval.  Define  two  more  intermediate  quantities 
initially  to  be 

=  9o  „ 

(6.62) 

92.  =  93 

A  A  A 

If  the  ( U  —  c )  wave  is  a  rarefaction  and  ( U  —  c)o(U  —  c)j  <  0,  then  compute  qim  (now 
defined  to  be  a  sonic  point)  from  go  using  Eqs.  6.57  (/,•  =  0,r;  =  1*)  along  with  the 


72 


NWC  TP  7207 


auxiliary  condition 

Uu  -ci.  =0  (6.63a) 

Similarly,  if  the  (U  +c)  wave  is  a  rarefaction  and  the  eigenvalue  changes  sign  between 
2  and  3,  compute  the  sonic  state  q2m  using  Eqs.  6.57  (/j  =  2*,r,  =  3)  along  with  the 
auxiliary  sonic  condition 

U2m  +  C2*  =  0  (6.63  b) 

Then,  define  the  various  positive  and  negative  flux  differences  of  Eq.  6.45  by 

dF+  =  max  (sign {(U  -  c)0},o)  (F(fll.)  -  F(q0)) 

+  max  (sign {(U  -  c)i},o)  (F(qi)  -  F{qu)) 

dFf  =  max  (-sign {(ft  -  c)0},o)  (F(qim)  -  F(g0)) 

+  max  (-sign {(U  -  c)i},o)  (Ffa)  -  F(?,.)) 

dF+  =  max  (sign{t7 , },o)  (F(q2)  -  F(«»)) 

;  -  \  (6-64) 

dFf  =  max  (-sign{U,},0j  (F(q2)  -  F{qx)) 

dF3+  =  max  (sign{(ff  +  c)2},o)  (F(q2.)  -  F(q2)) 

+  max  (sign {(0  +  c)3},o)  (F(q3)  -  F(q2.)) 

dFz  =  max  (-sign{(£  +  c)2},o)  (F(q2.)  -  F(q2)) 

+  max  (— sign{(£7  +  c)3},o)  (F(q3)  -  F(q2.)) 

Another  approach  to  utilizing  the  Godunov  scheme  is  to  directly  identify  qR  and  then 
to  compute  FR. 

Osher’s  Scheme 

In  Godunov’s  scheme,  when  any  of  the  waves  is  a  shock,  the  equations  for  the  in¬ 
termediate  states  are  not  explicitly  solvable  for  the  unknowns  and  iterative  techniques 
must  be  employed.  In  contrast,  Osher’s  numerical  algorithm  uses  an  approximate 
solution  to  the  Riemann  problem  which  results  in  explicit  expressions  for  the  inter¬ 
mediate  state  variables.  Osher  replaces  the  shock  wave  by  overturned  rarefactions38. 


73 


NWC  TP  7207 


Thus  the  wave  transition  for  both  nonlinear  fields  (for  the  ( U  — c )  field  and  the  (U  +  c) 
field)  are  described  in  terms  of  Eqs.  6.57  for  rarefaction.  The  resulting  six  equations 
lead  to  explicit  formulae  for  p\ ,  U\,p\,p2,  V?,p2.  Then,  Eq.  6.60  and  Eq.  6.61  can  be 
used  to  obtain  the  Cartesian  velocity  components.  Once  the  intermediate  variables 
are  computed,  the  corresponding  fluxes  are  computed  and  included  in  the  expressions 
for  dF±  using  the  same  expressions  presented  earlier  for  Godunov’s  scheme.  For  rea¬ 
sons  outlined  in  an  earlier  subsection  on  “Continuous  Transitions,”  the  Osher  scheme 
cannot  be  considered  to  be  a  physically  correct  Riemann  Solver  in  the  sense  that 
it  assumes  overturned  rarefactions.  For  the  same  reason,  we  cannot  use  the  Osher 
scheme  to  evaluate  the  “Riemann”  flux  using  Eq.  6.42.  Inverted  rarefactions  notwith¬ 
standing,  the  flux  differences  that  arise  in  Osher’s  scheme  can  be  used  in  Eq.  6.45  to 
result  in  a  satisfactory  numerical  algorithm. 

Roe’s  Scheme 


Roe’s  algorithm  is  based  on  the  exact  solution  of  an  approximate  Riemann 
Problem9.  In  Roe’s  approach,  specially  averaged  cell  interface  values  (denoted  by 
subscript  Roe)  are  determined  for  density,  velocity  and  enthalpy  ( h  =  'yp/((~r  - 
l)p)  +  (u7  +  v7  +  w7)/2) 


PryJFr  +  Ply/pi 

PRot  =  - ■/—  ^  Z. 

y/F  +  yjPX 

Ury /Tr  +  UXyfPl 


VRoe  — 


V  Rot  — 


WRot  = 


y/F  +  y/pi 
Vry/F  +  Vly/pj 
y/F  +  y/pi 
__  Wry/J~T  4-  Wly/pj 

VFr  +  Vri 

,  _  hry/p r  +  hly/pi 

ROt~  y/Fr+y/pi 

from  which  the  speed  of  sound  c  can  be  calculated  as 

<=*««  =  yj {hRot  ~  (tij*..  +  v7Rot  +  w\ot)l 2)(t  -  1) 


(6.65) 


(6.66) 


Using  these  specially  averaged  values,  Roe  evaluates  the  Jacobian  matrix  and  then 
considers  the  approximate,  linear,  Riemann  Problem  given  by 


3q  j.  a  dq  -  n 


(6.67) 


74 


NWCTP7207 


at  each  cell  face. 


The  exact  solution  to  this  problem  is  given  for  the  intermediate  states  as 


9«  9t  — 1  —  *  —  1,  .  .  .  ,  T7l 


(6.68) 


with  the  parameters  a,  evaluated  from  the  expressions 


<*.  =  liRot  ’  ($r  -  gi),  »  =  l,...,m  . 


(6.69) 


In  the  above  equations,  /,  are  the  left  eigenvectors  of  the  Jacobian  matrix,  evaluated 
such  that  they  are  orthonormal  to  the  collection  of  right  eigenvectors  r,  .  The  physical 
meaning  of  the  parameters  a,  can  be  identified  by  considering  the  state  space  of 
dependent  variables.  We  have  already  see  that  in  such  a  space,  the  equations  for  Aq, 
(Eq.  6.68)  imply  that  the  change  Aq,  in  dependent  variables  across  each  wave  family 
is  tangential  to  the  corresponding  right  eigenvector  and  that  a,  is  a  measure  of  the 
magnitude  of  that  change. 

Once  again,  knowing  quqj,  etc.,  the  various  fluxes  can  be  evaluated  and  included 
in  the  positive  and  negative  flux  differences  in  the  following  way  which  differs  from 
the  expressions  in  Eqs.  6.64  for  Godunov’s  and  Osher’s  schemes  only  because  the 
Riemann  Problem  in  Roe’s  scheme  is  linear,  and  consequently  all  the  wave  transitions 
are  linear  jump  discontinuities.  Additionally,  we  keep  the  three  repeated  eigenvalues 
U  distinct  because  their  corresponding  r,  are  linearly  independent.  Therefore  q o  =  qi 
and  qs  =  qr-  Thus,  the  various  positive  and  negative  flux  differences  of  Eq.  6.45  are 


75 


NWCTP7207 


now  defined  by 

dF?  =  max[sign{(£/  -  c)Roe},0][f(qi )  -  f(q0)) 
dF f  =  max(— sign {(U  -  c)/joe } , 0][/(^, )  —  f(q0)) 
dF '?  =  max{sign{£/Roe},0][/(g2)  -  /($])] 
dF2'  =  max(-sign{J/«oe},0][/(g2)  -  /(?i)] 
dF3+  =  max[sign{l/HOe},0][/(93)  -  /(?2)] 
dF?  =  max[— sign{Z/*ot},0][/(g3)  -  /(«2 )] 
dF4+  =  max(sign{t/Roe},0](/(g4)  -  f(q3)] 
dF?  =  max[-sign{L^iiOe},0][/(g4)  -  /(^3 )] 
dF?  =  max[sign{(F  +  c)*ot},0][/(g5)  -  f(qA)] 
dF?  =  max[— sign{(t/  +  c)KOe},0}(/(g5)  -  /(?4)] 


For  Roe’s  scheme,  the  values  of  dF?  can  also  be  directly  defined  to  be 

jr±  _  (^iBot  ^  l^i/lotl)  _  _  •  _  -I 

2  ®|T| Roe  »  •  —  1, .  •  .  • 


We  can  therefore  also  write 


(6.70) 


(6.71) 


|AF|  =  (JJ|A|L)R„(,r-4,)  .  (6.72) 


where  R  is  the  matrix  of  right  eigenvectors,  L  is  the  matrix  of  left  eigenvectors  (with 
RL  —  LR  =  I)  and  |A|  is  the  diagonal  matrix  of  absolute  values  of  the  eigenvalues 
A,' ,  1  —  1, .  1  • ,  m. 

Because  Roe’s  scheme  converts  the  actual  Riemann  problem  to  an  approximate 
one  that  is  linear,  there  are  no  continuous  transitions.  This  approach  does  not  rule 
out  expansion  shocks.  In  order  to  avoid  expansion  shocks,  a  modification  to  the  fluxes 
is  implemented  at  sonic  rarefactions. 


Replace  dF?  by  ±  ^--g-^Of,r,R<>t 

iff  ^*{91)  <  0  <  Ai(qr) 


(6.73) 


76 


NWCTP7207 


It  must  be  noted  that  the  augmented  diffusion  is  only  added  to  the  actual  field 
requiring  it  and  not  to  all  wave  families  at  a  sonic  rarefaction. 

Harten-Lax  Scheme 

The  Harten-Lax  scheme  will  be  described  in  future  editions  of  this  report. 
Rusanov  Scheme 

The  Rusanov  scheme  can  be  applied  within  the  present  framework  if  we  begin 
with  Eq.  6.72  and  replace  |A|  with  its  spectral  radius  |A|max 

|AF|  =  |A|m#x  (qr  -  qi)  .  (6.74) 


Lax-tViedrichs  Scheme 

The  Lax-FYiedrichs  scheme  can  be  applied  within  the  present  framework  if  we 
begin  with  Eq.  6.74  and  replace  the  spectral  radius  with  a  positive  constant  e 

|AF|  =  t(qr  -qi)  .  (6.75) 


77 


NWCTP7207 


7.0  GEOMETRY  FORMULATION  DETAILS 


The  geometry  formulation  in  UNIVERSE-series  unstructured  grid  codes  is  very 
flexible  and,  in  general,  can  handle  any  type  of  element  (conservation  cell).  In  partic¬ 
ular,  we  have  included  three  types  of  cells  at  present.  These  are  1)  the  hexahedral  cell, 
2)  the  triangular  prism  cell,  and  3)  the  tetrahedral  cell.  The  details  of  the  geome* ~y 
treatment  for  these  three  cell  types  are  given  in  this  section. 


lumbers  and  Coordinates 


A  cell  type  is  defined  by  the  number  and  placement  of  its  vertices.  A  complete 
definition  of  a  cell  type  would  aiso  include,  in  addition  to  the  vertices,  any  other 
nodes  needed  to  define  the  variation  of  the  geometric  variables  x,y,  z  in  the  cell  (see 
Fig.  4.2  on  higher-order  elements).  Taken  together,  the  vertex  nodes  and  other  nodes 
can  simply  be  referred  to  as  the  nodes  of  the  cell. 

We  asstime  a  local  coordinate  system  for  each  cell  (£,17,  <7,  Fig.  4.1).  The  vertex 
node  numbers  are  defined  in  terms  of  an  order  set  of  integers  and  the  values  of  the 
local  coordinates  at  each  vertex  are  defined  for  each  cell  type  in  Figs.  7.1,  7.2  and 
7.3. 


Shape  Function 


The  geometric  “shape  function”  Ni(£,ri,a)  was  defined  in  Eqs.  4.9-11  for  the 
three  cell  types.  Each  cell  node  is  associated  with  its  own  shape  function  which  is  a 
multidimensional  polynomial  in  £,17,  <7: 

K 

=  '£,Pik(Kl>’lmW<r"W  (7.1) 

1=0 

The  polynomial  coefficients  can  easily  be  obtained  by  solving  the  K  equations  result¬ 
ing  from  setting 


*7»» ^«)  ' —  1» 

=  0,  j  ^  i. 


(7.2a) 

(7.2a) 


Figure  7.3  Vertex  nodes  and  coordinates  for  tetrahedron 


NWC  TP  7207 


When  the  three-dimensional  geometry  polynomial  is  built  by  forming  the  product  of 
two  or  more  lower-dimensional  polynomials  (Eq.  4.10,  Eq.  4.11),  the  three-dimensional 
shape  functions  can  also  be  constructed  from  the  appropriate  lower-dimensional  shape 
functions. 

Local  Faces  and  Vertices 

Each  face  of  a  cell  is  defined  by  which  vertices  belong  to  it  (in  terms  of  local 
node  numbers).  The  faces  and  their  corresponding  vertices  are  identified  for  each  of 
the  three  cell  types  in  Figs.  7.4,  7.5  and  7.6. 

Cell-Face  Metrics  and  Normals 

The  method  used  to  compute  cell-face  normals  was  outlined  in  Section  4  in  the 
paragraphs  following  Eq.  4.11.  A  more  detailed  description  is  given  below. 

Given  the  geometry  polynomials  (Eq.  4.9,  Eq.  4.10,  or  Eq.  4.11),  the  tangents  to 
the  local  coordinate  directions  can  be  defined  by 

(  =  XtJ  +  ytk  +  Z(l 

v  =  **i + v.»*  +  V  (7-3) 

o  =  xej  +  y0k  +  z„l 

Next  we  identify  two  vectors  in  the  plane  of  the  cell  face  by  choosing  suitable  linear 
combinations  of  the  above. 

( Vj  \  _  (til  *12  *13 

\^2  J  \  *21  *22  *23 

The  transformation  matrix  in  the  above  can  be  defined  as  T 

r=0;;  t !;;)  <7-s) 

and  is  defined  for  each  face  of  each  cell  type  in  Figs.  7.7,  7.8  and  7.9.  The  T  matrix 
elements  are  selected  appropriately  to  account  for  the  fact  that  range,  in  each 


82 


NWCTP7207 


cell,  from  —1  to  +1  in  many  cases.  The  cross  product  of  V\  and  Vj  defines  the  cell-face 
normal. 


Cell-Face  Quadrature  Points 


At  every  cell  face,  the  integral  of  any  quantity  Q  over  that  face  cam  be  replaced, 
upto  the  desired  order  of  accuracy,  by  a  suitable  quadrature  formula 


u. 


Q(s ,  t)ds  dt  = 


Y,  <*«(*,«.•) 

quads. 


(7.6) 


where  s,t  are  the  representative  running  orthogonal  coordinates  tangential  to  the 
face,  and  subscript  *  denotes  a  quadrature  point.  The  coefficient  C,  is  the  “weight” 
assigned  to  the  i-th  quadrature  point.  For  the  three  cell  types  being  considered,  one 
encounters  only  two  types  of  cell  faces  —  “square”  or  “triangular”  (in  terms  of  the 
running  coordinates  s  and  t,  as  well  as  the  local  coordinates  Z,r),<r).  Tables  7.1  and 
7.2  represent  four-point  Gaussian  quadrature  points  and  weights  for  such  “square" 
and  “triangular"  cells.  This  leads  to  fourth-order  accuracy  in  the  evaluation  of  cell- 
face  integrals.  Figure  7.10  presents  these  quadrature  points  diagrammatically  (not 
necessarily  to  true  scale). 


s 

t 

D 

-0.577350269189626 

-0.577350269189626 

0.5 

+0.577350269189626 

-0.577350269189626 

m 

-0.577350269189626 

+0.577350269189626 

0.5 

+0.577350269189626 

+0.577350269189626 

0.5 

Table  7.1  Gaussian  quadrature  points  for  “square”  face 


83 


NWCTP7207 


s 

t 

C 

-0.487831473351 

-0.689897894859 

0.318041443825 

+0.487831473351 

-0.689897894859 

0.318041443825 

-0.204988807440 

+0.289898127317 

0.181958556175 

+0.204988807440 

+0.289898127317 

0.181958556175 

Table  7.2  Gaussian  quadrature  points  for  “triangular”  face 
Special  Cases 


While,  in  general,  the  four-point  Gaussian  quadrature  is  employed  for  three- 
dimensional  problems,  simpler  formulae  (with  fewer  quadrature  points)  can  be  used 
sometimes  without  any  loss  of  accuracy.  For  example,  with  hexahedral  cells,  the 
midpoint  rule  is  sufficient  for  one-dimensional  problems  in  the  one  significant  direction 
being  considered.  For  two-dimensional  problems,  a  two- point  quadrature  is  sufficient 
for  faces  spanning  the  third  direction  (the  two  points  are  along  the  line  that  bifurcates 
the  cell  in  the  third  direction). 

Calculation  of  Cell  Volume 


The  cell  volume  is  related  to  Eqs.  4.18  and  4.19 

-//X  V  •  (x;  +  yk  +  zl)dV 


(7.7) 


corresponding  to  t  =  0  in  Eq.  4.18.  The  volume  integration  can  be  replaced  by  surface 
integration. 

V=  /  J  J (V  •  Xo)dV 


= /X( *•* 


(7.8) 


)dS 


84 


NWC  TP  7207 


The  surface  integral  can,  in  turn,  be  converted  to  a  quadrature  formula  based  on 
Eq.  7.6. 


Strone-Conservation-Law  Form  in  General  Coordinates 


In  Section  5,  the  strong-conservation-law  form  was  introduced  for  hyperbolic 
systems  of  conservation  laws  in  Cartesian  coordinates.  In  future  editions  of  this 
report,  the  invariance  of  that  form  under  coordinate  transformations  will  be  discussed. 


Integral  and  Strong-Conservation-Law  Forms 


There  is  a  clear  and  useful  geometric  analogy  between  the  integral  form  and 
the  strong-conservation-law  form  of  the  equations.  This  will  be  elucidated  in  future 
editions  of  this  report. 


Physically,  uniform  flow  remains  uniform.  Numerically,  this  simple  fact  may  not 
be  true.  In  other  words,  when  a  numerical  method  is  applied  to  update  the  solution 
from  time  step  to  time  step  with  uniform  flow  as  the  starting  solution,  on  nonuniform 
grids  only  a  careful  construction  of  the  algorithm  will  guarantee  that  the  numerical 
solution  does  not  introduce  spurious  disturbances  into  uniform  flow.  These  issues  will 
be  considered  in  detail  in  future  editions  of  this  report. 


85 


NWC  TP  7207 


Figure  7.4  Faces  and  their  vertices  for  hexahedron 


Figure  7.5  Faces  and  their  vertices  for  triangular 


NWC  TP  7207 


SC-23 28-CS 


Face 

Vertex  0 

Vertex  1 

Vertex  2 

0 

0 

1 

2 

1 

0 

1 

3 

2 

1 

2 

3 

3 

0 

2 

3 

Figure  7.6  Faces  and  their  vertices  for  tetrahedron 


88 


NWCTP7207 


90 


NWC  TP  7207 


SC-2324-CS 

2 


! 

i 


Figure  7.8  Faces  and  their  transformation  matrix  for  triangular  prism 


92 


NWCTP7207 


SC-23 25- CS 


Figure  7.8  Faces  and  their  transformation  matrix  for  triangular  prism  —  continued 


93 


NWC  TP  7207 


Figure  7.8  Faces  and  their  transformation  matrix  for  triangular  prism  —  continued 


94 


NWC  TP  7207 


Figure  7.9  Faces  and  their  transformation  matrix  for  tetrahedron  —  continued 


NWCTP7207 


SC-23  77-CS 


Quadrature 
points  for 
4-vertex  face 


Quadrature 
points  for 
3-vertex  face 


Figure  7.10  Gaussian  quadrature  points  for  “square”  and  “triangular”  faces 


97 


NWCTP7207 


8.0  TOPOLOGY  TREATMENT 


This  section  describes  various  topology  issues  related  to  connectivity  of  nodes 
into  cells,  cells  common  to  a  node,  cells  with  a  common  face,  how  cells  may  be 
subdivided,  how  links  may  be  removed,  etc. 


The  computational  unstructured  mesh  is  defined  by  1)  specifying  the  set  of  nodes 
and  their  locations  (x,y,  z  coordinates  and  optionally  their  nodal  velocities  i,  y,  i), 
and  2)  specifying  the  set  of  nodes  that  comprise  each  cell.  These  node  numbers 
are  called  the  global  node  numbers.  Each  cell  has  an  ordered  collection  of  nodes 
numbered  locally.  When  the  global  nodes  of  each  cell  are  provided,  they  must  be 
given  in  the  same  order  as  the  local  node  numbers.  Therefore,  given  any  local  node 
number,  the  corresponding  global  node  number  is  easily  determined. 


Let  us  make  a  set  of  all  nodes  that  are  part  of  atleast  one  cell  in  the  total  collection 
of  cells  given.  This  may  be  a  subset  of  the  collection  of  nodes  for  which  the  locations 
have  been  provided.  The  extra  nodes  in  the  larger  set  are  those  nodes  not  needed  to 
define  any  cell.  These  nodes  (and  their  locations)  may  have  been  generated  during 
the  mesh  generation  process  but  were  not  used  because  their  inclusion  would  have 
resulted  in  cells  that  were  somehow  unsatisfactory.  The  ability  to  remove  redundant 
nodes  is  provided  for  in  the  unstructured-grid  UNIVERS E-series  formulation. 

During  the  process  of  removing  links,  a  topic  to  be  covered  later  in  this  section, 
some  cells  may  become  degenerate.  This  may  happen  in  two  ways:  1)  the  number  of 
distinct  global  vertex  node  numbers  is  less  than  four;  2)  the  number  of  distinct  vertex 
node  locations  is  less  than  four.  Case  1  deals  with  a  “logically”  degenerate  cell  and 
case  2  with  a  “physically”  degenerate  cell.  Removing  these  cells  become  redundant 
for  the  purpose  of  computing  the  dependent  variables.  Removing  such  redundant 
cells  corresponding  to  case  1  is  available  in  UNIVERSE- series  unstructured-grid  for¬ 
mulations  as  part  of  various  “grid  editing”  options. 


98 


NWCTP7207 


Cells  of  Given  Node 

Given  the  nodes  of  each  cell,  the  inverse  map  can  be  constructed.  This  provides 
knowledge  of  which  cells  include  the  given  node.  While  each  ceil  has  the  same  number 
of  nodes  (assuming  the  same  cell  type  for  every  cell),  the  number  of  cells  that  include 
a  given  node  varies  with  each  node.  We  have  verified  for  linear  elements  (only  vertex 
nodes)  that  the  sum  of  cells  associated  with  each  node  is  equal  to  the  number  of  cells 
times  the  number  of  nodes  per  cell  which  is  a  somewhat  surprizing  statement  at  first 
glance. 


Common  Faces 

Each  face  is  made  up  of  a  specific  set  of  local  node  numbers,  each  of  which  is 
mapped  on  to  a  global  node  number.  Using  the  knowledge  of  nodes  of  a  cell  and  cells 
of  a  node,  the  cells  that  share  a  common  face  can  easily  be  identified. 

Faces  are  numbered  sequentially  with  cell  number.  The  first  six  faces  belong  to 
the  first  cell,  the  next  six  faces  belong  to  the  second  cell,  etc.,  for  the  hexahedral  cell 
type.  Therefore,  face  numbers  are  related  directly  to  cell  numbers.  A  face  shared  by 
two  cells  sports  two  face  numbers,  one  that  identifies  it  as  part  of  the  first  cell  and 
another  that  identifies  it  as  part  of  the  second. 

A  given  face  of  a  given  cell  has  a  number  of  vertex  nodes.  Each  vertex  node  is 
associated  with  many  cells.  Out  of  these,  one  cell  is  the  cell  pointed  to  by  the  face 
number  being  considered.  There  is  not  more  than  one  more  cell  which  is  common  to  all 
nodes  of  the  face.  In  this  fashion,  the  cells  that  share  a  given  face  can  be  determined. 
It  then  becomes  a  relatively  trivial  matter  to  identify  which  face  of  the  second  cell 
is  identical  to  the  face  being  considered.  Thus  the  face  number  corresponding  to  the 
neighbor  cell  can  be  identified,  given  the  face  number  of  a  particular  cell.  Of  course, 
at  a  boundary,  a  face  can  only  be  part  of  one  cell,  the  interior  cell. 

Cell  Division 

For  various  reasons,  a  cell  may  have  to  be  divided  into  two  cells.  In  Phase  I,  cell 
division  capability  has  been  developed  for  the  triangular  prism  cell  type  for  use  in 


99 


NWCTP7207 


two-dimensional  inviscid  store- tracking  studies.  Figure  S.l  displays  a  situation  where 
one  face  of  a  triangular  prism  cell  has  been  divided.  If  the  face  is  common  to  two 
cells,  this  leads  to  both  cells  being  subdivided  into  two  cells  each. 

The  following  book-keeping  details  must  be  kept  track  of: 

1.  New  nodes  are  introduced  (with  global  numbers  greater  than  the  existing  maxi¬ 
mum. 

2.  New  cells  must  be  constructed  (with  cell  numbers  assigned  to  be  greater  than 
the  existing  maximum  values). 

3.  Two  existing  cells  must  be  redefined  to  account  for  their  being  made  of  different 
nodes  after  subdivision. 

4.  “Cells  of  node”  must  be  recomputed  in  the  vicinity  of  the  subdivided  cells. 

5.  “Face  to  face”  correspondence  must  also  be  reestablished  locally. 

Such  a  grid  “editing”  capability  has  been  developed. 

Link  Removal 

It  is  sometimes  desirable  to  remove  links.  In  Fig.  8.2,  the  short  link  ab  is  an 
example.  The  link  can  be  removed  by  moving  one  of  its  nodes  towards  the  other.  In 
this  example,  cells  2  and  5  become  degenerate  and  must  be  removed  from  considera¬ 
tion.  Node  b  merges  with  a  and  therefore  a  is  used  to  replace  b  in  all  cell  definitions. 
Consequently,  node  b  becomes  redundant  and  cati  be  removed  from  consideration  if 
necessary.  The  book-keeping  steps  are  given  below. 

1.  Node  b  for  all  cells  associated  with  b  must  be  replaced  with  node  a  (nodes  of  cells 
3  and  4  must  be  redefined). 

2.  Collapsed  cells  2  and  5  must  be  removed  from  the  database. 

3.  If  node  b  is  not  removed  from  database  and  must  be  used  for  some  purpose,  the 
location  coordinates  of  b  must  be  modified  to  coincide  with  node  a’s  position. 


100 


NWCTP7207 


4.  “Cells  of  node”  and  “face  of  face”  must  be  recomputed  in  the  local  region. 
Such  a  grid  editing  capability  has  also  been  developed. 


101 


After  cell  division 


Figure  8.1  Cell  division  for  triangular  prisms 


102 


NWCTP7207 


9.0  GRID  GENERATION  METHODOLOGY 


An  unstructured  2-d  mesh  generation  capability  based  on  a  distance  function 
concept39  had  been  developed  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  effort  described  in 
this  report.  While  this  approach  was  satisfactory  based  on  its  generality  and  versa¬ 
tility,  it  required  substantially  more  computer  time  than  another  method  developed 
during  Phase  I.  Therefore,  here  we  do  not  make  any  further  reference  to  the  above  grid 
generation  methodology.  However  the  two  grid  generators,  TRJM2D  and  TRIM3D, 
developed  during  Phase  I  will  continue  to  be  used  during  Phase  II  and  are  described 
here. 


TRIM2D 

TRIM2D  is  a  two-dimensional  triangular  element  mesh  generator  that  was  deliv¬ 
ered  to  NWC  during  Phase  I.  The  underlying  algorithm  is  based  on  a  two-dimensional 
triangulation  procedure  that  is  based  on  constructing  triangles  from  a  cloud  of  points. 
The  cloud  of  points  can  be  provided  by  existing  structured  grid  generators  or  from 
a  random  point  generator.  For  example,  the  cloud  of  grid  points  that  was  used  to 
generate  the  unstructured  grid  shown  in  Fig.  9.1  was  created  separately  for  the  fuse¬ 
lage  and  for  the  bomb  using  a  structured  grid  generator.  The  two  sets  of  points  may 
overlap.  A  deletion  capability  has  been  implemented  for  those  points  occurring  right 
at  the  same  position  or  too  close  each  other.  Similarly,  redundant  points  inside  the 
fuselage  and  bomb  are  also  deleted. 

TViangulation  is  accomplished  with  the  Delaunay  triangulation  using  an  advanc¬ 
ing  front  technique.  The  initial  front  is  composed  of  all  the  boundary  edges.  The 
detail  of  the  process  is  described  below. 

1.  An  edge  of  the  front  is  arbitrarily  picked  up  as  a  candidate  for  tri angulation. 
The  neighboring  points  on  the  advancing  side  of  present  edge  and  the  adjacent 
two  edges  are  first  collected  and  sorted  by  the  distance  from  the  present  edge. 

2.  A  circle  through  an  advancing- side  node  and  two  edge  endpoints  is  constructed. 
If  there  is  any  point  enclosed  in  such  a  circle,  this  node  is  replaced  by  the  enclosed 
point.  This  process  is  repeated  until  no  points  can  be  found  in  a  circumcircle, 


104 


NWCTP7207 


the  final  point  is  picked  for  triangulation  and  the  present  edge  is  deleted  from 
the  front  list.  If  there  is  any  new  edge  generated,  they  should  be  included  in  the 
front  list.  Figure  9.2  serves  to  illustrate  this  approach. 

3.  The  procedure  (l)-(2)  continues  until  no  front  edge  exists.  The  final  grid  should 
be  similar  to  that  obtained  using  any  other  method  based  on  Delaunay  trian- 
gulation.  This  is  because  the  Delaunay  tri angulation  procedure  uniquely  makes 
triangles  out  of  a  given  set  of  points  in  such  a  way  that  the  circumcircle  of  any 
triangle  contains  no  other  points. 

TRJM3D 

A  new  three-dimensional  unstructured  grid  generation  method,  related  to  the 
above  2-d  technique,  has  also  been  developed.  Chronologically,  TRIM3D  was  devel¬ 
oped  by  Dr.  Kuo- Yen  Szema  before  TRIM2D  was  developed  by  Dr.  Chung-Lung 
Chen,  both  of  Rockwell  Science  Center.  A  brief  description  of  this  technique  is  pre¬ 
sented  below  for  tetrahedral  cells. 

The  boundary  of  the  computational  domain  is  divided  into  several  patches. 
The  geometry  of  each  patch  is  described  by  specifying  a  sufficient  number  of  non- 
intersecting  lines  on  the  patch.  Each  line,  in  turn,  is  described  in  terms  of  a  sufficient 
number  of  points  on  the  line  (Fig.  9.3).  These  lines  are  arbitrary  and  are  specified 
by  the  user.  FYom  this  information  a  parametric  representation  (s,t)  of  the  surface  is 
developed  where  s  and  t  are  the  local  running  coordinates  in  the  plane  of  the  surface. 
For  convenience,  the  parameters  3  and  t  are  chosen  to  take  values  between  0  and  1, 
where  s  =  0,  3  =  1,  1  s  0  and  t  =  1  form  the  boundary  of  the  patch.  Nodes  are 
then  distributed  on  these  four  boundary  lines  satisfying  the  user-specified  clustering 
requirements.  Presently,  the  code  requires  that  the  number  of  nodes  on  at  least  any 
one  pair  of  opposite  sides  (s  —  0  and  s  =  1  or  t  =  0  and  t  =  1)  be  equal.  This 
restriction  will  be  removed  in  the  future. 

Internal  lines  are  generated  by  connecting  corresponding  points  on  a  pair  of 
opposite  sides  which  have  the  same  number  of  nodes.  Each  internal  line  is  then 
divided  into  line  segments.  The  length  of  line  segments  at  the  ends  of  an  internal 
line  is  determined  by  the  average  of  the  length  of  the  line  segments  on  the  boundary 
of  the  patch  that  intersect  the  given  internal  line.  The  length  of  the  remaining  line 


105 


0.  330 


NWCTP7207 


SC-1960-T 


Cj  c  C2  c  C3 


Fig.  9.2  Testing  advancing  front /Delauney  triangulation 


107 


NWC  TP  7207 


segments  on  an  internal  line  is  obtained  by  smoothly  blending  the  lengths  of  line 
segments  at  the  ends.  Triangular  elements  are  then  generated  by  connecting  the  line 
segments  according  to  the  recipe  described  in  Fig.  9.4. 

The  process  of  starting  from  triangular  elements  on  the  boundary  of  the  com¬ 
putational  domain  and  filling  up  the  domain  with  tetrahedra  employs  the  method  of 
“advancing  front”  in  Ref.  40.  This  technique  requires  specification  of  an  initial  surface 
divided  into  triangular  elements.  The  boundary  of  the  computational  domain  is  used 
as  the  intial  surface  of  the  advancing  front.  The  smallest  element  on  the  surface  is 
replaced  by  the  three  sides  of  a  new  tetrahedron  constructed  with  that  element  as  the 
base.  The  fourth  node  of  the  tetrahedron  is  obtained  either  from  one  of  the  existing 
nodes  or  by  creating  a  new  one  (Fig.  9.5). 

The  TRIM3D  grid  generation  consists  of  the  following  steps: 

(1)  Define  the  boundary  patches  (including  body  surface  and  outer  boundary). 

(2)  Triangular  elements  are  then  generated  on  each  patch  based  on  user  supplied 
information  regarding  the  number  of  points  and  mesh  streching. 

(3)  These  triangular  elements  are  used  as  initial  surface  of  the  advancing  front. 

(4)  Tetrahedral  cells  are  then  contructed  with  the  triangular  elements  as  bases.  In 
order  to  avoid  large  cells  intersecting  with  small  cells,  the  smallest  triangular 
element  from  the  list  of  faces  is  always  used. 

(5)  Select  or  create  a  point  to  form  a  tetrahedral  cell  from  the  base  triangular  element 
(ABC,  in  Fig.  9.6). 

a. )  The  point  D  can  belong  to  a  neighboring  triangular  element  (ACD)  as  long 

as  it  can  generate  a  tetrahedron  satisfying  certain  built-in  constraints.  See 
Fig.  9.6a  (top  figure). 

b. )  The  point  D  can  be  selected  from  an  existing  grid  or  from  a  list  of  points 

supplied  for  the  purpose.  See  Fig.  9.6b  (middle  figure). 

c. )  Otherwise,  a  new  point  D  can  be  created  to  form  the  new  tetrahedron.  See 

Fig.  9.6c  (lower  figure). 


108 


NWCTP7207 


(6)  Check  whether  the  newly  formed  cell  intersects  with  any  already  existing  cells. 

(7)  If  no  suitable  point  can  be  found,  some  old  cells  have  to  be  removed, and  repeat 
step  (5). 

(8)  The  new  faces  ABD  and  BCD  from  (5-a)  or  ABD,  BCD,  CAD  from  (5-b)  and 
(5-c),  the  new  cell  ABCD  and  new  point  D  from  (5-c)  are  all  added  to  their 
respective  lists  (face,  cell  and  point). 

(9)  Delete  the  old  face  (ABC)  from  the  list. 

(10)  Check  if  there  are  any  triangular  elements  remaining  in  the  front  .  If  yes,  go 
back  to  step  4. 

The  two  most  important  aspects  of  TRIM3D  are  1)  data  structure  and  2)  the 
logic  to  check  whether  any  two  tetrahedra  intersect  with  each  other.  These  aspects 
are  disscussed  in  the  following  section. 

Data  Structure 

In  order  to  find  the  smallest  triangular  element,  points  in  the  neighborhood  and 
neighboring  triangular  elements  efficiently,  the  data  structure  for  the  faces,  and  the 
grid  points  is  arranged  as  follows: 

Li$t  for  The  Frpnt  Fftc<? 

A  binary  tree  structure  is  used  to  form  the  front  face  list.  The  ordering  of  the 
tree  is  arranged  such  that  the  area  of  the  father  face  is  smaller  than  the  face  of  the 
two  sons.  Figure  9.7  shows  a  binary  tree  of  this  form.  The  area  of  each  face  and  its 
position  are  also  shown  in  this  figure.  It  is  noted  that  the  position  of  the  two  sons 
are  located  at  Iaonl  =  I  father  x  2  and  Isoril  =  I  father  x  2  +  1,  respectively.  For 
example,  Face  D  located  in  position  4  has  two  sons  located  at  position  8  (H)  and  9 
(I).  A  face  should  be  added  or  deleted  without  altering  the  binary  tree  ordering.  The 
ideas  of  the  heap-sort  and  heap-search  algorithms  (Ref.  41)  are  used  in  TRIM3D. 

a)  Adding  a  new  face  to  the  face  list: 


109 


NWCTP7207 


A  new  face  is  always  added  first  at  the  end  of  the  tree.  Then,  the  internal  order 
of  the  binary  tree  is  rearranged  by  comparing  the  face  areas  of  fathers  and  their  sons. 
This  procedure  can  be  described  as  follows: 

1)  A  face  J  with  area  4.0  is  to  be  added  to  a  binary  tree  in  Fig.  9.8. 

2)  Place  J  at  the  end  of  heap  list  (10  in  this  case). 

3)  Find  the  father’s  position  of  10  by  using  I  father  =  Ison/2.  Therefore  the 
father’s  position  is  5  and  the  face  is  £  in  this  case. 

4)  Compare  the  area  of  faces  J  and  E. 

5)  If  the  area  of  J  is  less  than  that  of  face  E,  interchange  the  position  of  father 
and  son  (see  Fig.  9.8a). 

6)  Unless  J  is  at  position  1  (top  of  the  list)  go  back  to  (3). 

b)  Delete  a  face  from  the  front  face  list: 

A  face  can  be  removed  from  any  position  from  the  tree.  Then,  the  internal  order 
of  the  tree  is  re-established  by  comparing  the  area  of  the  face  of  the  father  and  son. 

1)  Find  the  position  from  which  the  face  is  to  be  removed  from  the  tree.  For 
example,  we  can  consider  face  A  at  position  1  in  Fig.  9.8b. 

2)  Place  the  face  stored  at  the  end  of  the  tree  at  this  position  (1  for  this  case). 

3)  Find  the  two  sons  location  by  using  Isonl  =  I  father  x  2  and  Ison2  = 
I  father  x2  +  l. 

4)  Determine  if  the  father  and  son’s  position  should  be  changed  by  checking 
the  area  of  the  father  face  and  two  sons’  faces. 

if 

(Area(f ather)  <  mm(Area(sonl),  Area(son2))  :  no  change 

else 

change  father’s  position  with  the  smaller  area  son’s  position. 


110 


NWCTP7207 


5)  Repeat  step  4  until  no  change  is  reqired  (Fig.  9.9). 

In  this  binary  tree,  the  face  with  smallest  area  will  always  remain  at  the  top  of 
the  list  and  can  be  used  as  the  next  surface  to  be  removed. 

List  for  Points  in  the  Neighborhood 

An  octree  data  structure  is  used  to  efficiently  locate  points  in  a  neighborhood. 
The  fist  octant  is  determined  from  the  boundary  of  the  computational  domain.  At 
most,  eight  points  are  stored  in  each  octant.  If  ninth  point  falls  into  an  octant,  then 
it  subdivided  into  eight  smaller  octants.  This  procedure  is  continued  until  an  octant 
with  vacant  storage  is  found.  Figure  9.10  illustrates  this  process.  A  new  point  I  is 
added  and  it  falls  into  octant  1  which  already  contains  eight  points  A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H. 
It  has  then  to  be  divided  into  eight  smaller  octants  (octants  2-9).  The  newly  added 
point  I  with  old  points  D,E,F  are  relocated  in  octant  2.  In  the  TRIM3D  code  ,an  array 
IOCTR(U,  MX  OCT)  is  defined  to  store  the  points.  The  variable  MX  OCT  is  the 
maximum  number  of  octants  allowed.  For  each  octant  IOC,  the  following  information 
is  stored. 

IOCTR(ll,IOC)  =  —1  :  the  octant  is  full 

IOCTR(\\yIOC)  —  0  :  the  octant  is  empty 

IOCTR(ll,  IOC)  >  0  :  the  number  of  points  stored  in  this  octant 

IOCTR{  1  :  8,  IOC)  :  point  numbers  are  stored  here  if  IOCTR(\\,  IOC)  >  0 

The  maximum  and  minimum  x,  y,  z  are  also  stored  for  each  octant.  By  using  this 
octree,  the  neighboring  points  within  some  specific  distance  of  a  given  point  (x,  y,  z) 
can  easily  be  determined. 

Linked  LisLBejwgga  ppjnt  md 

In  an  unstructured  grid  generation  code,  it  is  important  to  determine  the  faces 
that  surround  a  given  point.  In  order  to  do  that,  an  address  pointer  array 
uLPION(IPONT)v 

for  each  grid  point  IG  is  first  allocated.  The  faces  surrounding  point  UIGV  are  saved 


111 


NWCTP7207 


in  an  array  LFAP0(8,  IG).  The  procedure  to  find  faces  surrounding  a  given  point 
IG  is  described  below: 

1)  Find  the  address  related  to  the  given  point  IG. 

IADRES  =  LPION(IG) 


2)  LFAP0(8 ,  IADRES)  >  0  defines  number  of  stored  faces. 

LFAP0(8,  IADRES)  <  0  implies  that  next  face  number  surrounding  the  grid 
point  IG  is  continued  at  the  address  abs(LF APO( 8,  IADRES)). 

3)  LFAPO(  1  :  7,  IADRES)  —  0  defines  an  empty  location 

LFAPO{  1 :  7,  IADRES)  >  0  denotes  face  number  for  face  which  surrounds  the 
point  IG.  This  method  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  9.11. 

To  Check  for  Intersecting  Faces 


In  the  process  of  generating  cells,  no  two  faces  must  intersect  each  other.  This 
condition  can  be  satisfied  only  if  no  side  of  either  face  intersects  the  other  face  (Figure 
9.12).  A  total  of  six  conditions  have  to  be  checked  to  make  sure  these  two  faces  do 
not  cross  each  other.  With  the  notation  given  in  the  figure,  determine  whether  a  side 
$3  (connecting  £4  and  £5)  intersects  the  face  gig 2  (£j,£2,£s).  The  intersection  point 
of  line  ^£3)  with  the  plane  defined  by  £1,  £2  and  £3  is  given  by 


-  -  .  (9l  *  &)•(*!  -  £<)- 

*/=*«  +  - /-  “  -  X — - 9 3 

(9 1  X  02)  ■  03 


The  segment  (£4 £3)  intersects  the  triangle  (£1 ,  £2,  £3)  if  £/  belongs  to  the  triangle 
itself.  This  procedure  leads  to  three  conditions  for  each  triangle.  If  all  six  conditions 
are  satisfied,  then  the  two  faces  do  not  cross. 


Mesh  Smoothing 


The  capability  to  “smooth”  mesh  point  locations  without  changing  cell  connec¬ 
tivities  has  been  developed.  Four  methods  are  now  compared  in  order  to  show  their 


112 


NWCTP  7207 


Input  points  on  an 
arbitrary  line 


Fig.  9.3  Surface  grid  generation 


113 


NWCTP7207 


SC- 14 10- T 


1)  start  with  (A,B). 

2)  There  are  2  choices: 

a)  A  can  be  connected  to  B’ 

b)  B  can  be  connected  to  A’ 

3)  compute  lengths  of  AB’  and  BA1  and  choose  the  shorter  one;  for  e.g.,  AB\ 

4)  since  B  is  not  connected  yet,  continue  the  process  with  (A,B). 

5)  2  choices  : 

a)  A  can  be  connected  to  C’ 

b)  B  can  be  connected  to  B' 

6)  compute  lengths  of  AC’  and  BB’  and  choose  the  shorter  one;  for  e.g.,  BB\ 

7)  since  both  A  and  B  are  now  connected,  continue  the  process  with  (B,C). 


Fig.  9.4  Recipe  for  generating  triangular  elements 


114 


NWCTP7207 


- :  initial  front  surface  divided  into  tringular  elements. 

ABC  it  CBD  :  two  of  the  initial  surface  elements. 

E  &  F  :  newly  generated  nodes. 

ABE  ,  BCE  ,  CAE  :  new  elements  that  replace  ABC. 

CBF  ,  BDF  ,  DCF  :  new  elements  that  replace  CBD. 

BFE  it  FCE  :  new  elements  generated  by  connecting  two  existing  nodes  E  and  F. 
They  replace  the  elements  BCE  and  CBF. 


Fig.  9.5  Advancing  front  technique 


NWC  TP  7207 


Fig.  9.7  Binary  tree 


117 


NWCTP7207 


Fig.  9.8  Addition  of  new  face  to  binary  tree 


120 


NWC  TP  7207 


SC-2337-CS 


Fig.  9.10  Construction  of  octree  —  continued 


121 


NWC  TP  7207 


LFAPO 


SC-2338-CS 


NWCTP7207 


relative  merits.  Figure  9.13  shows  the  original  mesh  which  was  constructed  inten¬ 
tionally  to  be  nonuniform  (with  different  grid  densities  in  different  regions).  This 
was  first  smoothed  using  an  algorithm  by  Batina.42  In  this  approach  based  on  each 
link  being  a  spring,  the  spring  stiffness  has  been  selected  to  be  inversely  proportional 
to  its  length.  The  results  are  not  very  satisfactory.  This  was  modified  by  assuming 
constant  stiffness  which  results  in  the  coordinate  for  each  node  being  the  arithmetic 
average  of  its  linked  neighbors.  The  corresponding  grid  is  shown  in  Figure  9.14.  The 
quality  of  the  mesh  is  better  than  that  of  Figure  9.15.  However,  in  general  such  an 
approach  can  lead  to  overlapped  cells  near  leading  edges  and  has  also  proven  to  be 
unsatisfactory  in  earlier  trials  in  three  dimensions.  The  third  approach  tried  was  to 
use  a  constant  spring  stiffness  but  a  spring  force  proportional  to  cell  volume.  The 
resulting  grid  is  shown  in  Figure  9.16.  This  grid  is  better  than  the  previous  ones.  An 
alternate  approach  was  developed  for  the  fourth  method.  In  this,  instead  of  assum¬ 
ing  springs  along  each  link,  a  force  balance  was  developed  at  each  vertex  based  on 
pressure  forces  proportional  to  cell  volume  acting  normal  to  each  face.  The  resulting 
grid  is  shown  in  Figure  9.17.  This  method  is  also  quite  satisfactory.  Finally,  three 
figures  are  attached  (Figures  9.18-20)  where  the  diamond  “airfoil”  has  been  allowed 
to  move  over  a  number  of  time  steps  to  various  locations  and  orientations. 

More  mathematical  details  of  the  various  “spring”  formulations  will  be  provided 
in  a  future  edition  of  this  report. 

Higher-Order  Geometry  Treatment 

Approaches  that  may  be  used  to  derive  higher-order  element  geometries  from 
meshes  generated  using  TRIM2D  and  TRIM3D  will  be  tried  out  in  Phase  II  and  will 
be  described  in  a  future  edition  of  this  report. 


124 


NWCTP  7207 


Fig.  9.13  Original  nonuniform  grid  for  use  in  smoothing  tests 


125 


NWCTP  7207 


Fig.  9.14  Grid  smoothed  using  Batina  formulation 


126 


Fig.  9.15  Smoothing  with  constant  stiffness  and  force  proportional  to  length 


127 


NWCTP7207 


Fig.  9.16  Smoothing  with  constant  stiffness  and  force  proportional  to  volume 


128 


NWCTP7207 


Fig.  9.17  Smoothing  with  “pressure”  proportional  to  volume 


129 


Fig.  9.18  Diamond  airfoil  moved  down  slightly  from  original  position 

130 


NWCTP7207 


Fig.  9.19  Grid  after  diamond  airfoil  has  rotated 


131 


NWC  TP  7207 


132 


NWC  TP  7207 


10.0  STORE  TRACKING  AND  GRID  ADAPTATION 


We  now  discuss  the  suitability  of  various  approaches  for  tracking  stores  separating 
from  their  parent  vehicle.  The  weapon  or  other  store  is  assumed  to  be  initially 
stationary  in  a  weapons  bay  (cavity)  and  subsequently  released  with  a  specified  initial 
dynamics.  It  then  moves  under  the  influence  of  aerodynamic  forces,  gravity  and  its 
own  rigid  body  dynamics  (6  degrees  of  freedom).  In  the  present  effort,  no  propulsion 
effects  is  included.  The  objective  is  to  track  the  motion  of  the  store  by  computing  the 
associated  unsteady  aerodynamic  flow  field  coupled  to  a  six-degree-of-freedom  model 
for  the  store  dynamics  (Fig.  10.1). 

A  computational  methodology  developed  to  meet  the  above  objective  could  ben¬ 
efit  from  the  following  attributes  and  capabilities. 

(1)  Grid  point  movement 

(2)  Regridding  and  interpolation  of  solution  from  one  grid  to  another 

(3)  Non-overlapped  patched-grid  capability  with  sliding  grid  option 

(4)  Overset  grid  capability 

Grid  Point  Movement 

When  the  store  moves  due  to  aerodynamic  loads  (or  motion  forced  on  it  by  the 
release  mechanism),  mesh  points  attached  to  the  store  must  move  with  the  corre¬ 
sponding  velocity.  All  mesh  points  in  an  appropriate  neighborhood  of  the  store  are 
also  moved  smoothly  with  respect  to  the  motion  of  the  points  on  the  store.  This 
can  be  achieved  using  a  method  which  assumes  that  the  connection  topology  of  the 
grid  is  a  connection  of  springs  of  suitable  stiffness.  Mesh  points  far  away  from  the 
moving  object  may  continue  to  remain  fixed  in  time.  The  node  points  inside  this 
region  (considered  as  a  collection  of  springs)  is  moved  in  an  iterative  process  until  the 
spring  system  reaches  equilibrium  based  on  a  suitable  minimum-energy  or  variational 
principle.  The  length  of  a  node  to  node  connection  can  be  used  as  a  measure  of 
spring  stiffness  and  new  locations  of  the  node  points  can  be  obtained  by  either  Jacobi 


133 


NWC  TP  7207 


scum-t 


R! 

P 

§| 

i 

■ 

■ 

II 

■ 

■ 

| 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

l 

■ 

a 

591 

■ 

IS 

ss 

■ 

■ 

81 

m 

■ 

■ 

5SS 

m 

m 

a 

a 

Wi 

Overset  Grid 


Non-overlapping 
Patched  Grid 


Fig.  10.1  Three  types  of  gridding  techniques  for  moving  bodies 


134 


NWC  TP  7207 


iteration  or  predictor-corrector  scheme.  The  primary  objective  of  this  approach  is  to 
develop  smooth  mesh  movement  that  is  related  to  body  surface  movement.  Examples 
of  various  grid  smoothing  ideas  were  provided  in  the  previous  section  (Section  9)  on 
grid  generation. 

Adding  and  Removing  Cells 

As  the  store  moves,  mesh  points  attached  to  the  store  will  move  with  it.  If 
we  do  not  want  to  continuously  smooth  the  mesh  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  store, 
we  will  encounter  situations  where  the  cells  next  to  the  store  surface  will  become 
unsatisfactory.  The  links  could  become  very  small,  for  example.  On  the  other  hand, 
links  may  become  very  large  too,  depending  on  the  local  direction  of  motion  of  the 
st  <-e.  When  the  angle  between  two  adjacent  faces  (or  lines  in  2-d)  becomes  greater 
then  a  specified  value  or  when  a  link  becomes  too  large,  a  cell  can  be  subdivided.  For 
removing  cells,  the  length  of  a  link  of  a  cell  could  be  used  as  a  critereon  in  the  case  of 
inviscid  flow.  For  both  inviscid  and  viscous  flows,  the  critereon  for  cell  division  or  link 
removal  could  be  based  on  the  goodness  of  the  local  numerical  solution  of  the  flow 
field.  When  the  cell  structure  is  changed,  the  solution  variables  have  to  be  reassessed. 
This  is  done  by  a  suitable  interpolation  from  the  cells  of  the  original  topology.  The 
advantage  of  local  operations  such  as  the  above  is  that  the  interpolation  process  is 
easy  since  no  global  searches  will  be  required.  In  Section  8,  we  discussed  several 
aspects  of  cell  division  and  link  removal. 

Regional  Remeshing 

In  a  chosen  region  around  the  moving  body  all  the  node  points  may  be  removed 
and  new  grid  is  generated  using  the  original  method  applied  to  the  selected  region. 
The  solution  reinterpolation  process  in  this  case  is  much  more  involved. 

Grid  Point  Movement  with  Regridding  Options 

We  first  consider  a  combination  of  the  attributes  (1),  (2),  and  (3).  An  intial 
grid  is  generated  for  the  stationary  store  and  the  steady  state  solution  is  obtained. 
The  initial  flow-field  generated  by  the  CFD  flow  solver  will  be  used  to  generate  the 


135 


NWCTP7207 


airloads  acting  on  the  store.  The  rigid-body  dynamics  of  the  store  will  be  us^d  to 
compute  the  store’s  response  to  the  airloads.  This  will  be  translated  into  grid  point 
velocities  for  those  nodes  situated  on  the  surface  of  the  store.  Grid  point  velocities 
can  also  be  assigned  to  all  nodes  in  a  chosen  small  or  large  region  surrounding  the 
store.  These  velocities  are  selected  to  be  dependent  in  a  convenient  way  on  the  nodal 
velocities  defined  on  the  store  surface.  The  fluid-dynamic  variables  and  the  grid  point 
locations  are  integrated  in  time  together.  This  results  in  node  point  motion  and  the 
conservation  cell  (element)  shapes  will  consequently  change  with  time.  After  a  lapse 
of  time,  the  resulting  cell  shapes  may  be  unacceptable.  A  new  grid  is  created  out  of 
the  old  grid  in  such  a  way  that  the  solution  can  be  easily  reinterpolated  on  to  the  new 
grid  from  the  old.  Grid  point  (element  vertex)  and  cell  removal  and  addition  (grid 
editing)  capabilities  can  be  defined  as  part  of  the  regridding  strategy.  Regions  of  the 
grid  can  slide  past  contiguous  regions  also.  This  sliding  mesh  technique  has  already 
been  employed  successfully  using  USA-series  codes  in  the  study  of  two-dimensional 
flow  past  a  rotor-stator  configuration  in  Ref.  34. 

Overset  Grids 

Overset  grids  require  information  from  the  underlying  grid  at  their  boundaries. 
The  information  contribution  from  the  overset  grid  to  the  underlying  grid  must  also 
be  determined.  This  could  be  highly  involved  and  complicated  in  three  dimensions. 
Therefore  overset  grid  approaches  will  only  be  considered  if  the  preferred  approach 
mentioned  above  (using  grid  movement  and  regridding)  is  inadequate.  The  interpo¬ 
lation  technique  required  for  the  regional  remesh  option  will  also  be  applicable  to 
overset  grids. 


136 


NWCTP  7207 


11.0  BOUNDARY  CONDITION  PROCEDURES 

We  now  discuss  some  theoretical  and  some  practical  issues  related  to  implement¬ 
ing  boundary  condition  procedures  in  the  UNIVERSE-series  formulation. 

Theoretical  Considerations 

In  Section  6,  we  described  the  Riemann  Initial  Value  Problem  (FVP)  and  its 
solution.  The  solution  involved  piecewise  constant  states  separated  by  transitions 
which  are  either  continuous  or  discontinuous.  The  initial  values  for  the  Riemann 
IVP  were  the  left  and  right  states.  Knowing  the  left  and  right  states  allowed  us  to 
solve  the  Riemann  problem  including  all  the  individual  transitions.  We  also  noted  in 
Section  6  that  each  transition  was  a  one-parameter  family  of  solutions. 

When  boundary  conditions  must  be  considered,  we  focus  our  attention  on  the 
Riemann  Initial  and  Boundary  Value  (IBVP)  problem.  At  a  “left”  boundary,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  we  assume  a  constant  state  to  the  right  of  the  boundary  along  with  boundary 
conditions  to  be  specified  at  the  boundary.  Let  us  consider  an  example  with  a  linear 
system  of  equations  where  there  is  one  eigenvalue  of  the  coefficient  matrix  that  is 
positive.  In  other  words,  one  wave  points  from  the  boundary  to  the  interior.  There¬ 
fore,  between  the  given  right  state  and  the  boundary,  there  is  only  one  transition  with 
one  free  parameter.  If  the  boundary  condition  is  specified  so  that  this  free  parameter 
can  be  determined,  the  Riemann  IBVP  can  be  solved.  If  there  are  two  right-moving 
waves  at  a  left  boundary,  two  suitable  boundary  conditions  will  be  required. 

The  nonlinear  case  is  a  little  more  complex  but  can  be  dealt  with  in  a  fashion 
similar  to  how  nonlinearities  were  treated  in  the  discussion  of  the  Riemann  IVP  in 
Section  6. 

This  serves  as  a  brief  but  general  introduction  to  the  theoretical  boundary  con¬ 
dition  framework.  We  postpone  for  the  future  a  detailed  discussion  of  various  specific 
boundary  conditions  including  surface  tangency,  supersonic  and  subsonic  inflow  and 
outflow. 


137 


NWC  TP  7207 


Practical  Considerations 

A  omplete  description  of  any  CFD  problem  to  be  solved  requires  geometry 
definition,  boundary  condition  specification,  and  initial  condition  specification.  Typ¬ 
ically,  different  boundary  conditions  axe  employed  at  different  boundaries.  One  would 
like  to  have  the  flexibility  of  being  able  to  specify  different  boundary  conditions  at 
each  boundary  point  or  cell  face  in  the  computation. 

In  structured  grid  multi-zonal  computations,  boundary  conditions  can  be  conve¬ 
niently  specified  by  “regions”.  A  “region”  of  the  boundary  can  be  identified  eas¬ 
ily  by  its  zone  number,  and  its  structured  grid  index  limits  (JBEG(NREG)  to 
JEND(NREG)  and  KBEG(NREG)  to  KEND(NREG),  for  example).  In  struc¬ 
tured  grids,  adjacent  cells  have  adjacent  values  of  the  indices  ( J  and  K  at  the  bound¬ 
ary  in  the  example  being  considered).  For  unstructured  grids,  the  situation  is  more 
complex.  Neighboring  cells  are  not  necessarily  tagged  with  consecutive  cell  numbers 
(this  is  impossible  except  in  one-dimensional  string  of  cells).  Based  on  the  face  num¬ 
bering  system  described  earlier,  this  also  implies  that  adjacent  boundary  faces  will 
not  have  face  number  identifiers  that  are  consecutive. 

One  easy  way  to  tag  boundary  locations  with  boundary  conditions  is  by  using 
global  node  numbers.  The  geometry  specification  is  typically  done  patch  by  patch. 
Node  numbers  in  a  patch  can  easily  be  numbered  in  consecutive  order  (except  at 
a  patch  boundary  which  is  common  to  another  patch).  If  we  want  to  impose  one 
boundary  condition  type  per  patch,  one  can  look  at  the  boundary  cell  face  being 
considered,  identify  the  global  node  numbers  of  the  vertices  of  the  face,  identify  the 
maximal  node  number,  and  apply  the  particular  boundary  condition  type  associated 
with  that  node.  This  is  the  approach  taken  in  UNIVERSE-series  codes. 


138 


NWC  TP  7207 

12.0  SOFTWARE  ARCHITECTURE  ISSUES 
A  Software  Triad 

A  very  flexible  and  versatile  software  architecture  framework  is  being  imple¬ 
mented  in  all  Science  Center  CFD  Department  projects  including  the  Store  Separa¬ 
tion  contract  with  NWC.  All  software  will  comprise  three  parts: 

1.  User  interface 

2.  Methodology  (Physics  and  Numerics) 

3.  Visualization 

Previously  most  CFD  groups  thought  in  terms  of  the  three  stages  of  preprocess¬ 
ing,  solution  runs,  and  postprocessing  and  the  software  was  aligned  with  these  three 
phases.  In  the  emerging  UNIVERSE-series  codes,  the  aim  is  to  think  in  terms  of 
problem  definition  phase,  solution  phase  and  analysis  phase.  The  solution  phase  will 
include  automatic  grid  generation,  flow  simulation,  grid  adaptation,  etc.  which  used 
to  hitherto  be  considered  separate  stages.  While  the  UNIVERSE-series  software  will 
require  little  or  no  runtime  intervention  on  the  part  of  the  user,  it  is  still  desirable 
to  allow  the  user  the  ability  to  track  the  solution  process  as  it  happens.  In  any  case, 
in  the  problem  definition  and  solution  analysis  phases,  user  involvement  is  a  must. 
Therefore,  in  the  new  software  architecture,  all  phases  of  CFD  will  include  the  user 
interface,  the  methodolgy  and  the  visualization  sections. 

The  user  interface  will  be  based  on  the  X-window  environment.  A  simpler  and 
conventional  approach  will  also  be  provided  for  use  from  “dumb”  terminals  where  the 
user  can  edit  a  file  of  control  variable  inputs  to  control  a  subsequent  CFD  run.  The 
user  interface  software  will  interact  with  the  methodology  and  visualization  software 
as  appropriate. 

The  software  segment  identified  as  “methodology”  will  consititute  the  bulk  of 
the  computer  program  libraries.  This  will  include  all  information  about  grid  genera¬ 
tion,  book-keeping,  solution,  physics  modeling,  numerical  modeling,  etc.  It  will  also 
include  all  software  needed  to  generate  information  to  be  handed  over  to  the  visualiza¬ 
tion  segment  for  graphical  display  purposes.  For  example,  it  will  be  the  responsibility 


139 


NWCTP7207 


of  “methodology”  to  generate  the  streamlines  while  it  will  be  the  responsibility  of 
“visualization”  to  display  the  streamlines  via  the  user  interface.  The  “methodology” 
segments  will  interact  with  the  user  interface  and  visualization  segments  as  appropri¬ 
ate. 


The  visualization  segment  will  handle  the  creation  of  graphical  objects  and  their 
manipulation  and  display  using  information  provided  by  the  user  interface  and  the 
methodology  and  will  interact  with  the  other  two  segments  as  appropriate.  It  is 
of  considerable  advantage  to  program  the  visualization  segment  using  a  standard 
graphics  library  such  as  “PHIGS+”.  On  the  other  hand,  the  visualization  segment  is 
much  smaller  than  what  used  to  comprise  “plotter”  software.  Therefore,  it  becomes 
very  easy  to  create  multiple  versions  of  visualization  software,  one  using  the  Silicon 
Graphics  graphics  library,  for  example,  and  another  using  PHIGS-h 

In  a  graphics  exercise  for  postprocessing,  the  user  interface  will  obtain  from 
the  user  information  about  what  the  user  wants  to  plot,  how  many  contour  levels, 
viewpoint,  light  sources,  etc.  The  “methodology”  will  provide  the  actual  contour  lines 
or  polygons  with  function  values  at  the  vertices,  etc.  The  visualization  software  will 
take  all  this  and  produce  a  rendered  image  which  will  go  back  to  the  user  interface 
for  display. 

The  three  segments  will  be  three  processes  running  either  on  the  same  computer 
or  even  on  three  different  computers.  They  will  communicate  via  message  passing 
using  RPC  protocol  (Remote  Procedure  Call)  and  “sockets”  which  are  part  of  the 
TCP/IP  network  protocol. 

This  approach  will  provide  total  consistency  between  methodology  and  graphics. 
Therefore  much  more  appropriate  information  will  be  displayable  including  for  exam¬ 
ple:  piecewise  polynomial  behavior;  right  hand  side  values  to  detect  location  of  large 
transients;  local  accuracy  measures  based  on  differences  between  “right”  and  “left” 
values  at  cell  interfaces;  numerical  flux;  geometry  patch  and  problem  specification 
information.  This  approach  also  minimizes  the  amount  of  work  in  the  “visualization” 
segment  so  that  it  will  be  easy  to  port  those  modules  to  various  hardware  platforms 
and  graphics  libraries. 

The  approach  presented  will  alleviate  the  need  for  large  amounts  of  real  memory, 


140 


NWCTP7207 


disk  space,  etc.  on  all  the  computers  being  used.  For  example,  let  us  assume  that  a 
large  scale  simulation  is  performed  on  a  CRAY  computer  and  the  results  stored  on 
its  local  disks.  Let  us  also  assume  that  a  Silicon  Graphics  work  station  is  available 
for  graphics.  The  user  interface  and  visualization  software  will  then  be  able  to  run 
on  the  Silicon  Graphics  work  station  and  the  information  that  is  needed  for  display 
can  be  supplied  over  the  network  using  the  methodology  program  running  on  the 
CRAY.  Typically,  only  a  few  planes  of  information  from  a  full  CFD  simulation  are 
displayed  at  any  one  time.  This  prevents  having  to  bring  the  entire  solution  file  from 
the  CRAY  to  the  work  station.  Of  course,  an  even  better  scenario  is  for  the  user 
interface  software  to  be  run  on  an  even  cheaper  “X”  workstation  leaving  the  Silicon 
Graphics  with  its  “graphics  engine”  to  be  able  to  perform  rotations  and  translations 
using  that  but  passing  on  the  pixel  information  back  the  “X”  station  for  display. 

The  Use  of  C  Language 

The  C  language  offers  many  attributes  that  can  greatly  help  the  development  of 
very  versatile  CFD  software  as  part  of  UNIVERSE-series  code  development.  Since 
most  CFD  software  today  has  been  written  in  FORTRAN,  a  comparison  of  certain 
features  of  the  two  languages  is  presented  below  for  review.  The  C  language  is  playing 
a  major  role  in  the  software  being  developed  as  part  of  all  UNIVERSE-series  projects 
including  the  work  sponsored  by  NWC. 

1.  Greater  compartmentalization: 

C  is  a  structured  language  while  FORTRAN  is  not.  In  C,  it  is  easier  to  com¬ 
partmentalize  code  from  data.  This  means  that  all  information  and  instructions 
necessary  to  perform  a  single  task  can  be  hidden  from  the  rest  of  the  program. 
One  example  is  that  local  variables  can  be  declared  within  any  code  block.  An¬ 
other  example  is  that  the  default  argument  passing  into  functions  is  by  value 
(except  for  vectors). 

2.  Local  variables: 

As  pointed  out  earlier,  in  C  local  variables  can  be  defined  within  code  blocks. 
The  variables  needed  within  a  for  loop  can  be  defined  within  the  loop.  This 
assists  in  compartmentalization.  Local  variables  can  be  static. 


141 


NWCTP7207 


3.  Variable  types: 

C  includes  variables  types  of  const,  extern,  static,  register,  auto,  const  is  like 
FORTRAN’S  parameter,  extern  is  like  FORTRAN’S  common  but  with  far  greater 
flexibility  that  can  assist  in  compartmentalization  (static  extern  variables  are 
known  only  within  the  file  they  were  defined  in),  static  is  like  FORTRAN’S  save 
but  since  variables  can  be  defined  within  each  code  block,  static  can  result  in 
variables  having  far  more  precise  scope  (locality)  than  is  possible  in  FORTRAN. 
There  are  no  register  variables  in  FORTRAN.  Other  variable  types  that  have 
no  counterparts  in  FORTRAN  are  volatile  and  void.  C  does  not  have  variables 
of  type  complex.  However,  CRAY  Standard  C  includes  complex  variables  and 
arithmetic. 


4.  Arithmetic  operators: 

C  has  a  larger  collection  of  arithmetic  operators  including  %  (modulo  division), 
—  (decrement)  and  ++  (increment)  which  are  not  found  in  FORTRAN. 


5.  Bitwise  operators: 

C  has  a  rich  collection  of  bitwise  operators  not  found  in  FORTRAN  in  the  form 
of  operators.  These  include  left-shifts,  right-shifts,  and  the  Boolean  operators  of 
AND,  OR,  EXCLUSIVE-OR,  NOT,  etc. 

6-  ?  Conditional: 

C  has  a  very  special  conditional  operator  using  ?.  An  example  is 

x  =  10; 

y  =  x>  9?  200:100 


Another  one  is 

#define  abs(t)  (i)  <0?  —  (i) :  (*) 


7.  Pointer  variables  and  arithmetic: 

C  includes  pointer  arithmetic.  Standard  FORTRAN77  does  not.  C  has  included 


142 


NWC  TP  7207 


pointers  from  the  beginning.  C  pointers  include  the  ability  to  define  pointers  to 
pointers  and  even  pointers  to  functions.  In  FORTRAN  also,  there  is  a  feature 
similar  to  pointers  to  functions  so  that  we  can  pass  the  name  of  a  function  as  an 
argument  to  a  subprogram. 


8.  Arrays: 

Both  C  and  FORTRAN  support  unidimensional  and  multidimensional  arrays. 
Some  differences  are  noteworthy.  FORTRAN  arrays  are  stored  in  memory  by 
columns.  C  arrays  are  stored  by  rows.  C  array  references  assume  that  position  0 
is  the  first  value  along  each  dimension.  In  FORTRAN,  the  default  first  position 
is  identified  by  a  subscript  value  of  1.  In  FORTRAN,  the  beginning  and  ending 
values  of  each  subscript  can  also  be  specified  as  part  of  the  dimension  statement. 
This  can  be  achieved  in  C  but  only  indirectly.  The  syntax  of  array  specification  is 
also  different  for  C  and  FORTRAN.  FORTRAN  uses  “DIMENSION  4(10,20)”. 
C  uses  “double  a [20]  [10]”.  In  C  pointer  arithmetic  can  be  used  to  conveniently 
handle  array  operations  and  often  pointers  and  arrays  are  intermingled. 

9.  Compile  time  aiztof  function: 

C  includes  a  compile-time  aiztof  function  which  can  greatly  enhance  portability 
of  the  code. 

10.  Xhg.coxnmft: 

C  includes  very  flexible  statement  formats.  One  special  punctuation  mark  is  the 
The  operator  can  be  used  to  string  together  several  expressions.  When 
used  on  the  right  hand  side  of  an  assignment  statement,  the  value  assigned  is  the 
value  of  the  last  expression  of  the  comma-separated  list. 

*  -  (V  =  3,y  +  1). 

In  C,  many  variables  can  also  be  equated  to  a  single  expression. 


11.  Structures: 

C  includes  the  ability  to  define  “structures”  which  are  a  very  powerful  data 
formats. 


143 


NWCTP7207 


12.  Casts: 

C  includes  a  quite  formal  way  to  perform  type  conversions. 

13.  Shorthand  notation: 

C  includes  some  shorthand  operators  like  l‘+=”.  This  is  not  a  particularly  great 
advantage.  The  increment  and  decrement  operators  discussed  earlier  are  more 
important  features  because  they  can  lead  to  more  efficient  instructions  being 
generated  by  the  compiler. 

14.  Conditional  blocks: 

C  includes  the  standard  “if1  and  “else”  constructions. 

15.  Switch: 

C  includes  the  “switch”  feature.  The  “switch”  is  rather  like  the  computed  goto 
statement  in  FORTRAN. 

16.  Loops: 

C  has  three  loops,  1)  the  for  loop,  2)  the  while  loop  and  3)  the  do  while  loop. 
FORTRAN  only  has  one  type.  The  first  two  may  not  execute  even  once  (like 
ANSI-standard  FORTRAN77  loops)  while  the  last  will  always  execute  the  loop 
body  once. 

17.  Return; 

C  includes  the  “return”  statement  similar  to  FORTRAN  except  that  in  C  this 
statement  can  be  used  to  return  a  particular  value. 

18.  Jumps: 

C  does  not  exclude  jump  statements  like  “goto”  and  “break”.  The  “continue” 
statement  in  C  loops  skips  to  the  next  iteration  of  the  loop  and  is  therefore  not  a 
dummy  statement  like  in  FORTRAN.  In  C,  one  can  even  jump  from  the  middle 
of  one  function  to  the  middle  of  another  (using  “setjmp”  and  “longjmp”). 


144 


NWCTP7207 


19.  Exit: 

Through  the  “exit()”  function,  the  C  program  can  pass  an  error  code  and  control 
back  to  the  operating  system. 

20.  Dynamic  memory  allocation: 

Standard  C  includes  dynamic  memory  allocation  (from  the  heap)  routines  like 
“malloc”,  “calloc”,  “realloc”  and  “free”. 

21.  Command  line  arguments: 

Command  line  arguments  are  standard  part  of  the  C  language.  A  C  program 
can  use  “argc”  and  “argv”  very  effectively. 

22.  Recursion: 

On  every  computer  system,  C  is  a  recursive  language.  A  function  can  call  itself. 
This  can  help  add  readability  to  &  program.  When  parallel  computers  came  on 
the  scene,  FORTRAN  compilers  had  to  be  made  “stack”-based  and  recursive.  C 
was  recursive  from  the  beginning. 

23.  Union  and  Enumeration: 

Along  with  “structures”  discussed  earlier,  C  includes  other  complex  data  types 
called  “unions”  and  “enumerations”,  union  is  like  equivalence  in  FORTRAN. 

24.  Pit  fi<?14s: 

Bit  fields  can  be  defined  for  “structures” .  This  can  greatly  reduce  memory  allo¬ 
cations  by  giving  us  the  ability  to  pack  bit-field  information  into  a  single  word 
rather  than  using  a  word  a  byte. 

25.  Typedef: 

The  “typedef”  construction  allows  us  to  define  new  names  for  existing  types. 
This  enhances  readability  of  source  code. 


145 


NWC  TP  7207 


26.  Flexible  I/O: 

C  includes  very  flexible  I/O  features.  This  includes  the  ability  to  perform  random 
I/O  on  binary  files.  Both  buffered  and  unbuffered  I/O  can  be  performed.  Stream 
flushing  is  standard  part  of  the  language.  Even  standard  input  and  output 
can  easily  be  redirected.  Input /output  operations  can  also  be  done  with  main 
memory  used  as  the  buffer  area  (e.g.  using  functions  “sscanf”  and  “sprintf”). 

27.  Preprocessor  directives: 

A  very  useful  set  of  preprocessor  directives  is  standard  paxt  of  the  language. 
Macro  definitions,  conditional  compiling,  etc.  can  easily  be  accomplished.  ANSI 
C  includes  the  “#pragma”  directive  which  is  used  to  define  machine-dependent 
treatments  like  vectorization,  parallization,  etc.  This  is  similar  to  the  “CDIR$” 
compiler  directives  on  the  CRAY  computer  for  FORTRAN  programs. 

28.  Built-in  debug  primitives: 

C  includes  “-LINE-”,  “-FILE-”,  ”-DATE_”,  “—TIME—”,  and  “_STDC_” 
variables  which  may  be  exploited  by  the  programmer  to  provide  debug  informa¬ 
tion  in  a  very  portable  fashion.  For  example,  the  “—LINE—”  predefined  macro 
contains  the  line  number  of  the  currently  compiled  line  code.  The  “—FILE—” 
identifier  is  a  string  that  contains  the  name  of  the  source  file  being  compiled. 
These  two  can  be  reset  using  the  “#line”  preprocessor  directive.  The  “—DATE—” 
macro  contains  the  date  of  translation  of  source  code  into  object  code  and  the 
corresponding  time  is  in  “—TIME—”. 

29.  Commas: 

C  offers  a  much  more  flexible  commenting  capability  than  FORTRAN.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  a  C  comment  can  be  an  embedded  part  of  any  line. 

30.  Errors: 

Execution  errors  can  easily  be  identified  using  “errno”  which  is  a  global  variable 
and  the  function  “perror”. 


146 


NWCTP7207 


31.  Signals: 

C’s  “signal()"  function  may  be  used  to  specify  the  function  to  be  executed  if  the 
specified  signal  is  received.  The  signal  could  be  for  abort  termination,  errors  in 
arithmetic,  invalid  function,  system  interrupt,  invalid  memory  access,  external 
termination  request,  etc. 

32.  Unique  temporary  files  and  filenames: 

C  includes  standard  functions  to  access  a  temporary  file  and  create  a  temporary 
file  name. 

33.  String  and  character  manipulation: 

The  C  library  includes  a  very  powerful  set  of  string  and  character  manipulation 
functions.  If  our  programs  should  include  an  ability  to  parse  input  expressions, 
FORTRAN  would  prove  to  be  very  clumsy  for  that  purpose  and  one  would  have 
to  employ  C. 

34.  Exit  processing: 

C  includes  a  very  powerful  exit  processing  capability  using  functions  such  as 
“atexit()”  and  “abort()”.  This  can  also  assist  in  developing  very  user-friendly 
software  because  the  computer  program  can  be  written  to  provide  internal  trace- 
back  and  diagnostics. 

35.  Sorting  and  searching: 

C  includes  library  functions  to  perform  “quick  sort”  and  “binary  search”  opera¬ 
tions  on  records. 

36.  System  interface: 

C  includes  a  library  function  “system()n  which  can  be  used  to  run  any  system 
command.  Along  with  “getenvQ”,  etc.  C  can  easily  be  interfaced  with  the 
operating  system.  Remember  that  the  whole  UNIX  operating  system  was  written 


147 


NWC  IP  7207 


in  C.  C  provides  many  standard  system  interface  functions  related  to  “time”  and 
“date”  information. 


37.  Mathematical  functions: 

C  includes  the  usual  mathematical  functions  including  the  trigonometric  func¬ 
tions,  hyperbolic  functions,  exponential  and  logarithmic  functions  and  some  mis¬ 
cellaneous  functions.  C  includes  a  random  number  generating  routine.  C  does 
not  have  standard  library  routines  to  handle  complex  variables  because  C  does 
not  include  variables  of  type  complex. 


38.  Consistency  checks: 

The  C  compiler  performs  many  consistency  checks  assisted  by  the  fact  that  all 
variables  have  to  be  declared  and  typed.  ANSI  C  also  includes  a  feature  called 
function  prototyping  which  assists  in  checking  consistency  between  function  calls 
and  function  declarations.  Most  UNIX  operating  systems  include  a  utility  called 
“lint”  which  can  be  used  to  detect  features  of  the  named  C  program  that  are 
likely  to  be  bugs,  to  be  non-portable,  or  to  be  wasteful.  It  also  performs  stricter 
type  checking  than  does  the  C  compiler.  The  FORTRAN  equivalent  of  “lint”  is 
available  but  not  standard  and  therefore  is  often  not  found  in  the  standard  set 
of  utilities  on  all  installations,  with  UNIX  or  otherwise. 


39.  C  and  FORTRAN  coexistence: 

In  most  modern  environments,  especially  those  that  use  the  UNIX  operating 
system,  C  and  FORTRAN  routines  can  be  linked  together  to  produce  a  single 
executable.  This  is  particularly  easy  when  self-contained  subprograms  are  be¬ 
ing  linked.  FORTRAN  “COMMON”  blocks  are  somewhat  more  tricky  to  refer 
to  from  C  but  I  am  aware  that  atleast  on  CRAY  computers  running  UNICOS, 
C  externals  can  be  referred  to  from  FORTRAN  programs.  Character  variables 
are  also  treated  differently  in  C  and  FORTRAN.  There  are  also  natural  incom¬ 
patibilities  when  it  comes  to  data  types  not  available  in  one  language  or  the 
other. 


148 


NWCTP7207 


40.  Main  program: 

FORTRAN  main  program  can  be  named  anything  by  the  programmer.  The 
C  main  program  must  be  called  “main”.  It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that 
command  line  arguments  are  passed  to  the  C  “main”  program  automatically  and 
can  be  used  when  desired. 


41.  Variable  length  and  type  parameter  lists: 

In  C,  you  can  specify  a  function  that  has  a  variable  number  and  type  of  param¬ 
eters.  For  example,  this  declaration  specifies  that  func()  will  have  at  least  two 
integer  parameters  and  an  unknown  number  (including  zero)  of  parameters  after 
that. 

func  (int  i,  int  j,  ...); 

The  three  dots  denote  the  presence  of  variable  length  arguments.  FORTRAN 
does  not  have  such  a  feature. 


42.  Length  of  function  and  variable  names: 

In  C,  an  identifier  is  a  sequence  of  letters  and  digits.  The  first  character  must 
be  a  letter;  the  underscore  counts  as  a  letter.  Upper  and  lower  case  letters  are 
different.  Identifiers  may  have  any  length,  and  for  internal  identifiers,  at  least  the 
first  31  characters  are  significant.  Internal  identifiers  include  preprocessor  macro 
names  and  all  other  names  that  do  not  have  external  linkage.  These  features  can 
be  used  to  write  software  that  is  very  clearly  understandable. 


44.  Variable  length  arrays: 

At  this  moment,  ANSI  C  does  not  permit  variable  dimensioning  of  arrays.  This 
is  merely  an  annoyance  because  of  C’s  pointer  capabilities.  However,  CRAY 
Standard  C  permits  variable  length  arrays.  This  feature  has  also  been  proposed 
as  an  addition  to  the  Standard  through  the  Numerical  C  Extensions  Group 
(NCEG). 

44.  Summary: 

C  is  a  very  flexible  and  powerful  language.  ANSI  standard  C  has  far  more 


149 


NWCTP7207 


standard  features  than  ANSI  standard  FORTRAN.  On  every  machine,  C  is  a 
recursive  language.  On  every  machine  with  ANSI  C,  it  is  easier  to  run  the  same 
program  without  makir’P'  any  changes,  even  when  the  program  includes  many  so¬ 
phisticated  constructions.  For  example,  we  have  only  one  C  version  of  a  utility 
called  “utof”  that  converts  a  large  “update”  source  file  into  individual  “.f”  files 
and  simultaneously  produces  the  corresponding  “makefile”  with  all  the  proper 
dependencies.  On  each  machine  that  we  use,  we  used  to  have  a  different  FOR¬ 
TRAN  version.  Another  example  is  the  “update”  emulator  written  by  Rockwell 
NAAO  personnel.  It  is  far  more  easy  to  write  portable  code  in  C  than  in  FOR¬ 
TRAN.  C  has  all  the  usual  features  available  in  FORTRAN  except  complex 
variables  and  arithmetic.  C  has  built-in  memory  allocation  functions,  built-in 
system  interfaces  (especially  to  UNIX),  a  very  flexible  debug  capability  that  can 
be  exploited  by  us,  pointer  capability,  etc.  When  you  look  at  C,  you  are  looking 
at  a  language  powerful  enough  to  write  the  whole  operating  system  (UNIX).  Can 
we  say  the  same  for  FORTRAN? 

Common  I/O  for  C  and  Fortran 


It  is  equally  easy  to  read  or  write  ASCII  (text)  files  using  C  or  FORTRAN.  The 
one  difference  is  that  in  “free”  format,  the  C  language  recognizes  only  “white  space” 
as  a  delimiter  between  successive  entities  and  does  not  recognize  a  also  for  the 
purpose.  FORTRAN  has  a  built-in  record-oriented  sequential  binary  I/O  capability 
which  adds  to  each  record  information  regarding  record  length.  The  C  language  does 
not.  While  it  is  very  easy  to  do  very  sophisticated  file  manipulation  in  C,  without 
the  record-oriented  I/O  features,  we  decided  to  develop  a  C  language  capability  that 
mimics  the  FORTRAN  record-oriented  sequential  I/O.  In  this  fashion,  users  are  able 
to  write  out  grid  files  using  standard  FORTRAN  constructions  and  the  flow  solver 
can  read  the  grid  in  as  if  the  computer  code  was  written  in  FORTRAN  also.  Similarly, 
disk  output  produced  by  the  UNIVERSE-series  flow  solver  can  easily  be  read  in  for 
post-processing  purposes  by  user- developed  codes  which  are  written  in  FORTRAN. 


150 


NWCTP7207 


Integrated  Debugging  and  Diagnosis 


The  availability  of  macro  definitions  as  part  of  the  standard  language  makes  it 
very  easy  to  develop  an  integrated  debugging  and  diagnosis  capability  into  software 
such  as  UNIVERSE-series  codes  that  is  written  in  C.  For  example,  test  cases  and  even 
test  routines  can  be  kept  part  of  the  source  code  in  “dormant”  mode  by  enclosing  the 
sections  with  suitable  logic  controlled  by  macro  definitions.  For  example,  if  a  section 
of  code  is  surrounded  by  “#ifdef  IFDEBUG”  and  “#endif”,  only  when  IFDEBUG 
is  defined  before  this  section  of  code  using  “^define  IFDEBUG”  will  this  section 
even  be  compiled.  This  is  far  more  convenient  than  commenting  and  uncommenting 
large  sections  of  code,  a  trick  that  is  often  used  by  FORTRAN  programmers.  The 
availability  of  “—FILE—”  and  “—LINE— ”  also  helps  in  providing  file  and  line  numbers 
to  the  user  when  an  improper  condition  is  encountered  during  a  run  and  detected  by 
code  logic.  This  feature  greatly  helps  in  reducing  software  development  time  also. 

Dynamic  Memory  Allocation 


We  have  already  mentioned  the  dynamic  memory  allocation  capability  available 
in  standard  C.  If  there  is  one  feature  that  must  be  singled  out  to  demonstrate  how 
the  C  language  offers  great  benefits  as  the  language  of  choice  for  writing  UNIVERSE- 
series  codes,  it  is  this.  UNIVERSE-series  unstructured  grid  codes  exploit  this  feature 
to  (1)  allocate  only  as  much  memory  as  is  needed,  (2)  allocate  it  automatically  based 
on  information  regarding  mesh  size  and  run  options  supplied  by  the  user,  (3)  increase 
or  decrease  the  storage  automatically  depending  on  whether  new  cells  and  nodes  are 
created  or  existing  cells  and  nodes  eliminated,  (4)  automatically  allocate  temporarily 
needed  memory  space,  etc. 


151 


NWCTP7207 


13.0  DISCUSSION  OF  OPTIONS  AND  FEATURES 

This  section  provides  a  compendium  of  options  and  features  available  in  the 
UNIVERSE-series  unstructured  grid  flow  solver  from  the  user’s  point  of  view.  This 
section  will  be  revised  from  time  to  time  to  keep  pace  with  the  current  status  of  the 
code  and  this  edition  is  therefore  current  as  of  November,  1991. 

Various  Equations 


The  present  version  of  the  unstructured-grid  UNIVERSE-series  code  (UNIVC) 
includes  the  ability  to  solve  either  the  linear  wave  equation,  the  inviscid  Burgers’ 
equation,  or  the  Euler  equations  for  compressible  flow. 

Riemann  Solvers 

For  the  linear  wave  equation  and  the  inviscid  Burgers’  equation,  only  one  choice 
is  provided  corresponding  to  the  exact  Riemann  Solver.  For  the  Euler  equations,  five 
choices  are  provided:  (1)  Rusanov  scheme,  (2)  Godunov  scheme  (exact),  (3)  Roe’s 
scheme,  (4)  Osher’s  scheme,  and  (5)  Harten-Lax  scheme. 

Types  of  Cells 

Three  types  of  cells  can  be  selected:  (1)  hexahedron,  (2)  triangular  prism,  (3) 
tetrahedron.  The  formulation  can  automatically  handle  degenerate  versions  of  the 
first  two  types  of  cells.  For  example,  if  one  face  of  a  hexahedron  collapses  to  become 
a  point,  a  pyramid  with  a  quadrilateral  base  results. 

Flux  Masks 

An  option  to  not  compute  fluxes  for  certain  faces  of  each  cell  can  be  exercised 
if  those  fluxes  are  redundant  for  the  particular  computational  simulation.  For  hex- 
ahedral  cells,  each  pair  of  faces  can  be  selected  (corresponding  to  the  local  £,  r?  or 
a  coordinate).  For  triangular  prisms,  the  a  direction  faces  (triangular  faces)  can  be 


152 


NWCTP7207 


masked  off  or  the  three  quadrilateral  faces  can  be  masked  off.  For  tetrahedral  faces, 
all  faces  can  either  be  masked  off  together  or  not  at  all. 

Spatial  Accuracy 

A  spatial  accuracy  of  upto  6-th  order  is  available  for  one- dimensional  problems. 
Multidimensional  problems  can  take  advantage  of  accuracies  of  upto  4-th  order.  The 
degree  of  the  actual  interpolation  polynomials  used  to  achieve  these  accuracies  is  one 
less  than  the  order  of  the  accuracy  specified.  The  dimensionality  of  the  problem  can 
be  specified  as  1-d,  2-d  or  3-d.  For  1-d  problems,  the  solution  polynomial  is  expressed 
in  terms  of  x  only.  For  2-d  polynomials,  x  and  y  are  used  and  for  3-d  polynomials  all 
spatial  variables  (x,  y  and  z)  are  empolyed. 

Temporal  Accuracy 

Time  accuracies  of  order  1,  2,  or  4  are  selectable.  The  first -order  scheme  is 
based  on  the  Euler  explicit  formulation.  The  second-order  scheme  is  based  on  the 
second-order  Runge-Kutta  formulation  and  the  fourth-order  method  is  based  on  the 
standard  fourth-order  Runge-Kutta  formulation.  In  the  future,  methods  based  on 
Taylor-series  expansion  in  time  may  be  employed.19 


Integration  of  quantities  over  a  cell  face  is  replaced  by  a  suitable  numerical 
quadrature.  This  is  needed  for  both  geometric  quantities  as  well  as  the  dependent 
variables.  A  four-point  quadrature  is  always  used  for  integrating  geometric  quanti¬ 
ties  unless,  a  simpler  formula  is  applicable  without  any  loss  of  accuracy  (see  Section 
7  for  details.  The  user  is  allowed  to  specify  the  quadrature  formula  to  be  used  for 
integrating  the  fluxes  of  solution  variables.  The  midpoint  rule  can  be  selected.  This 
would  imply  the  use  of  one  value  of  flux  per  face  and  one  value  of  cell-face  normals. 
An  average  value  of  the  cell-face  normal  (evaluated  using  the  appropriate  geometry- 
variable  integration  procedure  as  outlined  above)  is  used  for  the  purpose.  Another 
option  is  to  use  multi-point  quadrature  together  with  this  average  value  of  metrics. 
This  does  not  cause  any  loss  of  accuracy  as  long  as  the  cell  face  is  planar  and  not 


153 


NWCTP7207 


curved.  The  last  and  most  sophisticated  option  allows  the  local  value  of  the  cell-face 
normals  to  be  evaluated  at  each  of  the  multiple  quadrature  points. 


Selection  of  Neighbors 


An  underlying  algorithmic  capability  has  been  provided  to  select  neighbors  as 
those  cells  that  share  a  common  node  (CNN)  or  those  that  share  a  common  face 
(CFN).  The  ability  to  select  CFN  at  interior  cells  and  CNN  at  boundary  cells  has  also 
been  constructed.  These  options  are  not  controllable  by  the  user  at  this  time.  At  the 
present  time,  only  the  CFN  approach  is  used  to  construct  neighborhood  hierarchies. 
For  each  level,  the  cells  that  share  a  common  face  with  the  existing  collection  of  cells 
are  added  to  the  collection,  beginning  with  the  central  cell.  If  after  or dcr of  accuracy — 
1  passes,  the  number  of  distinct  cells  in  the  neighborhood  set  of  cells  does  not  exceed 
the  number  of  polynomial  coefficients  in  the  polynomial  interpolation  chosen,  one 
more  pass  is  performed  to  add  cells  to  the  neighborhood.  If  the  number  of  cells  is  still 
not  greater  than  the  number  of  polynomial  coefficients,  the  degree  of  the  polynomial 
is  lowered  until  this  condition  is  met. 


ENO  Options 


Three  ENO  interpolation  options  are  provided  at  this  time.  The  first  is  quite 
experimental  and  is  based  on  the  “best  term"  approach  outlined  in  Section  4.  The 
second  and  third  options  are  based  on  the  “best  stencil”  approach.  In  the  second 
approach,  the  stencil  is  selected  by  comparing  a  single  measure  of  variation  evaluated 
for  each  polynomial  in  the  neighborhood.  In  the  third  approach,  a  hierarchial  selection 
process  is  used.  A  norm  of  the  first  variation  (say  sum  of  absolute  values  of  the  first 
derivatives)  is  compared  for  first-level  neighbors  of  the  cell  under  consideration.  The 
stencil  identifier  is  moved  to  the  cell  with  a  “substantially”  lower  norm.  Next  a  norm 
of  the  second  variation  is  compared  for  first-level  neighbors  of  the  current  stencil 
identifier  and  the  identifier  is  shifted  to  the  cell  with  a  substantially  lower  value  of 
the  norm.  The  process  is  repeated  as  many  times  as  the  degree  of  the  interpolating 
polynomial  selected.  The  interpolating  polynomial  corresponding  to  the  final  position 
of  the  stencil  identifier  is  adjusted  to  match  the  original  cell’s  cell-average  value  and 


154 


NWCTP7207 


then  used  as  the  piecewise  polynomial  for  that  cell.  The  second  method  is  the  least 
computationally  intensive,  followed  by  the  third  which  in  turn  is  trailed  by  the  first. 

1-d,  2-d,  Axisymmetric  and  3-d  Capability 

The  dimensionality  of  the  problem  can  be  selected  as  1-d,  2-d  or  3-d.  This  se¬ 
lection  determines  the  type  of  polynomial  expansion  to  be  used  (see  the  section  on 
Spatial  Accuracy).  For  1-d  problems,  the  hexahedral  cell  type  is  very  convenient. 
For  2-d  problems,  the  hexahedral  or  triangular  prism  cell  types  are  useful.  For  3-d 
problems,  all  cell  types  can  be  used.  For  axisymmetric  problems,  the  2-d  polyno¬ 
mial  can  be  selected  along  with  an  axisymmetric  slice  of  a  3-d  grid  representing  the 
problem.  Fluxes  in  the  third  direction  are  not  masked  out  and  boundary  conditions 
corresponding  to  no  mass  flux  through  those  faces  are  used. 

Integrated  2-d  Plotting  Capability 

An  integrated  two-dimensional  plotting  capability  is  provided  that  is  useful  in 
applications  requiring  only  one  layer  of  cells  of  the  hexahedral  or  triangular  prism 
type.  The  display  device  is  assumed  to  be  a  Tektronix  4100  or  4200  series  color 
terminal.  The  computational  grid  can  be  displayed  either  in  black  and  white  or 
colored  by  a  selected  function  value.  Each  2-d  cell  face  can  be  colored  by  a  single 
color  representing  the  cell-average  value  of  the  chosen  function.  Function  profiles 
along  a  range  of  cells  can  be  plotted.  Monochrome  or  color  line  contours  can  be 
shown.  One  interesting  contouring  option  available  uses  the  local  polynomial  for 
each  cell  leading  to  possibly  discontinuous  contour  lines  at  cell  interfaces.  The  level 
of  discontinuity  can  be  a  measure  of  local  accuracy  in  smooth  regions  and  can  help 
identify  flowfield  discontinuities  also. 

Saving  Least-Squares  Polynomial  Constructors 

The  least-squares  polynomial  evaluation  procedure  was  described  in  Section  4 
(Eq.  4.28).  An  option  is  provided  to  save  the  collection  of  neighbors  of  each  cell  along 

—  y 

with  the  least-squares  polynomial  constructor  for  each  cell  given  by  ( A  A)~1A 
When  the  cell  topology  changes,  the  neighborhoods  must  be  recomputed.  Even  if  the 


155 


NWCTP  7207 


grid  points  move  without  a  change  in  connectivity  between  cells,  the  least-squares 
constructor  has  to  be  reevaluated.  These  interrelationships  are  displayed  in  Fig.  13.1. 

Structured  to  Unstructured  Mesh  Transformations 

Single- zone  structured  grids  can  be  given  as  input  to  the  flow  solver.  The  code 
can  automatically  convert  this  to  produce  an  “unstructured”  mesh  with  one  of  the 
three  cell  types.  This  is  accomplished  by  using  the  cells  as  they  are  for  the  hexahedral 
cell  type,  by  dividing  each  structured  grid  cell  into  two  triangular  prisms  for  that  type, 
and  by  dividing  it  into  five  tetrahedra  for  the  third  type. 

Save  Metrics  or  Compute  as  Needed 

The  average  values  of  cell-face  metrics  for  each  face  can  be  stored  if  necessary  or 
computed  as  needed. 

Solution  of  Linear  Equations 

A  set  of  linear  equations  must  be  solved  for  the  least-squares  reconstruction  pro¬ 
cedure.  It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  the  coefficient  matrix  is  symmetric. 
It  is  also  positive  definite  as  long  as  the  collection  of  neighborhood  cells  is  suitable. 
For  debugging  purposes,  the  user  can  select  an  efficient  linear-equation  solver  that  is 
applicable  only  to  symmetric  positive-definite  matrices  or  a  general  Gaussian  elimi¬ 
nation  procedure  with  partial  pivoting.  The  former  employs  no  pivoting  strategy. 

Grid  Smoothing  Options 


As  described  in  Section  9  on  grid  generation,  several  grid  smoothing  procedures 
have  been  implemented  and  tested.  These  options  will  be  documented  in  more  detail 
in  future  editions  because  they  are  still  being  changed  and  developed  substantially. 


Several  grid-point  movement  strategies  are  being  developed  and  tested  in  com¬ 
bination  with  various  local  grid  editing  features.  These  will  be  documented  in  future 
editions. 


1S6 


NWCTP7207 


NWCTP7207 


14.0  ILLUSTRATIVE  EXAMPLES 


Several  results  sire  presented  in  this  section  to  provide  an  illustration  of  the  com¬ 
putational  capability  of  the  UNIVERSE-series  formulation  presented  in  this  report. 

Linear  Wave  Equation 


The  one-dimensional  linear  wave  equation  was  solved  using  fourth-order  spatial 
and  temporal  accuracy  with  eighty  hexahedral  cells  strung  equally  spaced  along  the 
i  direction.  The  boundary  condition  was  fixed  at  the  left  boundary  and  the  initial 
conditions  were  chosen  to  be  the  step  function.  Figure  14.1  shows  the  profile  of 
the  dependent  variable  after  enough  time  has  elapsed  to  move  the  step  function  to 
the  right  by  about  half  the  computational  domain.  The  third  ENO  formulation  was 
employed.  The  lack  of  numerical  oscillations  near  the  step  is  proof  that  the  ENO 
formulation  is  effective. 


Burgers*  Equation 

The  same  case  was  repeated  but  this  time  by  solving  the  inviscid  Burgers’  equa¬ 
tion.  The  result  is  shown  in  in  Fig.  14.2.  The  discontinuity  is  represented  as  a  steep 
drop  with  no  spurious  numerical  oscillations,  once  again  verifying  the  ENO  capability. 

Ringleb  Flow 

The  Ringleb  flow7  was  studied  using  linear,  quadratic,  and  cubic  least-squares 
reconstruction.  The  expected  order  of  accuracy  is  2,  3,  and  4,  respectively.  Both 
quadrilateral  and  triangular  (prism)  cells  were  employed.  The  latter  are  constructed 
by  subdividing  each  quadrilateral  cell.  A  fine  grid  with  700  quadrilateral  cells  (36 
x  21  point  structured  mesh)  and  a  coarse  grid  with  180  cells  (19  x  11  point  mesh) 
were  used.  Table  14.1  presents  the  results  of  the  accuracy  study  undertaken  using 
the  two  types  of  cells  and  two  levels  of  grid  resolution.  The  error  is  computed  by 
measuring  the  /j  norm  of  the  difference  between  exact  solution  and  numerical  solution 
at  the  centroid  of  each  cell.  The  four  columns  of  numbers  correspond  to  errors  in 


158 


NWCTP7207 


total  energy  per  unit  volume,  density,  x-momentum,  and  y-momentum,  respectively. 
Results  are  presented  for  both  midpoint  and  two-point  Gaussian  quadrature  formulae. 
The  results  verify  the  accuracy  of  the  implementation. 

Subsonic  Flow  Past  Circular  Cylinder 

An  unstructured  mesh  with  triangular-prism  elements  was  employed  for  the  in- 
viscid  flow  past  a  circular  cylinder  (Fig.  14.3a).  The  pressure  contours  and  surface 
pressure  distribution  obtained  at  a  free  stream  Mach  number  of  0.4  is  presented  in 
Figs.  14.3b-c.  Second-order  least-squares  reconstruction  procedure  was  used  here. 
The  surface  pressure  distribution  obtained  using  the  USA-series  code  employing 
a  second-order  upwind  TVD  scheme  (and  quadrilateral  cells)  is  also  presented  in 
Fig.  14.3c.  This  figure  demonstrates  the  accuracy  of  the  solution  obtained  using  the 
least-squares  reconstruction  procedure. 

Hypersonic  Flow  Past  Circular  Cylinder 

Hypersonic  flow  past  a  circular  cylinder  (Moo  =  10)  was  computed  with  third- 
order  spatial  accuracy  and  ENO  option  1  using  a  structured  mesh  of  61  x  33  points. 
The  built-in  two-dimensional  plotting  capability  was  used  to  produce  contour  lines 
cell  by  cell  using  each  cell’s  piecewise  polynomial.  As  has  been  pointed  out  earlier, 
in  high-gradient  regions  and  near  discontinuities,  the  left  and  right  values  at  cell 
interfaces  (based  on  the  left  and  right  polynomials)  can  be  noticeably  different.  In 
smooth  regions,  the  differences  between  left  and  right  values  will  not  be  significant. 
This  behavior  is  seen  in  Figure  14.4  which  represents  pressure  contours.  This  example 
illustrates  the  capability  of  the  formulation  to  capture  very  strong  shock  waves. 

Sphere/Cylinder  as  Axisymmetric  Flow 

The  ability  to  be  able  to  compute  axisymmetric  flows  is  demonstrated  in  this 
next  case  where  supersonic  flow  (M,*  =  3)  over  a  sphere/cylinder  combination  was 
computed  using  one  slice  of  a  spherical  grid  as  has  been  described  earlier.  The  grid 
is  relatively  coarse  as  can  be  seen  from  the  figure.  The  same  “discontinuous”  contour 
plotting  technique  used  in  the  previous  case  was  employed  for  this  case  also  and  the 


159 


NWC  TP  7207 


resulting  contours  axe  also  seen  in  the  figure.  The  pressure  distribution  along  the 
surface  of  the  sphere  has  also  been  presented. 

G.R.I.D  Configuration 


Figure  14.6  shows  a  composite  view  of  the  unstructured  2-d  grid  with  triangular 
elements  and  pressure  contours  for  a  calculation  of  a  Mach  4  flow  past  a  multiply 
connected  region  whose  boundaries  appear  as  the  word  “GRID”.  A  single  color  is 
used  in  each  grid  element.  The  method  used  to  generate  the  grid  is  based  on  a 
distance  function  concept  presented  in  Ref.  39.  First-order  spatial  accuracy  was  used 
to  produce  this  result.  This  example  serves  to  demonstrate  the  flexibility  of  the 
unstructured  gridding  approach  and  is  otherwise  not  particularly  significant. 

Oblique  Shock  Problem 


Figures  14.7a-d  display  results  from  a  study  of  a  two-dimensional  problem  in 
which  there  is  a  single  oblique  shock  running  from  the  lower  left  corner  to  the  upper 
right  corner  of  the  grid  shown  in  Fig.  14.7a.  The  free  stream  Mach  number  is  2.0  and 
the  oblique  shock  angle  is  40°.  Free  stream  and  after-shock  conditions  are  imposed 
on  the  left  and  lower  boundaries,  respectively.  There  are  10  quadrilateral  cells  along 
each  of  the  directions  x  and  y.  Pressure  profiles  plotted  by  connecting  the  cell- 
average  values  along  x  at  various  constant-y  locations  are  shown  in  Figs.  14.7b- 
14. 7d.  Figure  14.7b  was  generated  using  first-order  accurate  reconstruction  (which  is 
automatically  ENO).  Figure  14.7c  corresponds  to  second-order  ENO  reconstruction 
and  Figure  14. 7d  results  from  fourth-order  ENO  reconstruction.  These  results  serve 
to  verify  the  effectiveness  of  the  multidimensional  ENO  reconstruction. 

For  problems  with  steady  shock  waves,  the  best  results  can  be  obtained  with  a 
shock-aligned  mesh  and  a  good  Riemann  solver.  In  our  flexible  formulation,  this  can 
be  achieved  by  just  subdividing  the  quadrilateral  cells  that  straddle  the  shock  wave 
into  two  triangular  cells.  The  corresponding  grid  and  solution  are  shown  in  Figs. 
14.7e-f.  The  Riemann  solver  due  to  Roe  was  used  for  this  example. 


160 


NWCTP7207 


Two-Dimensional  “Aircraft”  and  “Store” 


Figure  14.8  shows  Gouraud-shaded  pressure  contours  for  a  two-dimensional  sim¬ 
ulation  of  transonic  flow  (M0 c  =  0.85,  a  =  1.25°)  past  a  two-dimension  projection  of 
a  fighter  configuration  provided  by  NWC. 


F-18  Configuration 


The  surface  grid  and  surface  pressure  contours  from  a  computational  simulation 
of  transonic  flow  ( Moo  =  0.85,  a  =  0°)  past  an  F-18  configuration  with  pylon,  rack, 
and  bombs  are  displayed  in  Fig.  14.9. 


Space  Shuttle  Multi-Body  Configuration 


Figures  14.10a-f  present  the  geometry  and  corresponding  flow-field  solution  for 
the  Space  Shuttle  Orbiter  with  External  Tank  (ET)  and  Solid  Rocket  Booster  (SRB) 
flying  at  =  1.55,  a  =  -5.5°.  The  surfacegrid  which  is  represented  by  8731  nodes 
and  14386  triangular  faces  is  shown  in  Fig.  14.10b.  The  solution  is  obtained  using 
18288  nodes  and  a  total  of  78737  tetrahedral  cells.  Figure  14.10d  presents  the  surface 
pressure  distribution  on  the  fuselage  at  <f>  =  180°  (upper  center  line).  The  chordwise 
pressure  distributions  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  wing  are  given  in  Fig.  14.10e.  The 
results  show  that  the  present  predictions  are  in  good  agreement  with  experimental 
data.  The  pressure  distribution  on  the  surface  of  the  entire  configuration  is  shown 
in  Figs.  14.10c  and  14.10f.  The  basic  features  of  the  flow  (shocks,  shock  interaction 
between  the  Orbiter  and  ET,  between  the  SRB  and  ET,  and  expansion  waves)  have 
been  captured  well.  In  contrast  with  earlier  inviscid  work,11  the  present  approach 
required  almost  no  effort  for  grid  generation  (the  problem  of  geometry  definition  of 
the  surface  remains  the  same). 


161 


Variable  1L1 


62 


Variable  1L1 


NWC  TP  7207 


163 


NWC  TP  7207 


FOR  QUADRILATERAL  GRID 


2nd  order 
midpoint 
COARSE  GRID 
3.377E-3  1.267E-3 

FINE  GRID 
8.079E-4  3.000E-4 

AVERAGE  RATIO  OF  LI 

3rd  order 
midpoint 
COARSE  GRID 
1.790E-3  6.481E-4 

FINE  GRID 
3.431E-4  1.243E-4 

AVERAGE  RATIO  OF  LI 

3rd  order 

gaussian-two  points 
COARSE  GRID 
1.501E-3  5.902E-4 

FINE  GRID 
1.939E-4  7.802E-5 

AVERAGE  RATIO  OF  LI 

4th  order 

gaussian-two  points 
COARSE  GRID 
1.394E-3  5.502E-4 

FINE  GRID 
1.215E-4  4.829E-5 

AVERAGE  RATIO  OF  LI 


FOR  TRIANGULAR  GRID 
3rd  order 

gaussian-two  points 
COARSE  GRID 
1.193E-3  4.376E-4 

FINE  GRID 
1.740E-4  6.312E-5 

AVERAGE  RATIO  OF  LI 

4th  order 

gaussian-two  points 
COARSE  GRID 
3.836E-4  1.456E-4 

FINE  GRID 
2.777E-5  1.041E-5 

AVERAGE  RATIO  OF  LI 


1.765E-3  1.062E-3 

3.248E-4  2.174E-4 

NORM:  4.68 

8.345E-4  4.969E-4 

1.558E-4  9.906E-5 

NORM:  5.20 

8.156E-4  5.173E-4 

1.122E-4  7.040E-5 

NORM:  7.48 

5.616E-4  5.292E-4 

4.878E-5  3.091E-5 

NORM:  12.88 


6.101E-4  3.892E-4 

8.385E-5  4.776E-5 

NORM:  7.30 

1.971E-4  1.566E-4 

1.329E-5  1.019E-5 

NORM:  14.50 


Table  14.1  Ringleb  flow  results 


164 


Figure  14.4  Hypersonic  flow  past  a  circular  cylinder 


NWCTP7207 


SC53643 


Cells 


Pressure  piecewise  contours 


Pressure  profiles 


1.0 


Figure  14.5  Supersonic  flow  past  sphere/cylinder  in  axisymmetric  mode 


NWC  TP  7207 


Figure  14.8  Simulation  of  a  “two-dimensional”  fighter 


173 


175 


177 


NWC  TP  7207 


15.0  REFERENCES 


[1]  A.  Harten  and  S.  Osher,  “Uniformly  High-Order  Accurate  Non- Oscillatory 
Schemes  I,”  SIAM  Journal  on  Numerical  Analysis ,  Vol.  24,  pp.  279-309,  1987; 
also  MRC  Technical  Summary  Report  No.  2823,  May  1985. 

[2]  A.  Harten,  B.  Engquist,  S.  Osher  and  S.  Chakravarthy,  “Uniformly  High  Order 
Accurate  Essentially  Non-Oscillatory  Schemes  III,”  Journal  of  Computational 
Physics ,  Vol.  71,  pp.  231-303,  1987;  also  ICASE  Report  No.  86-22,  April  1986. 

[3]  S.  R.  Chakravarthy,  A.  Harten,  and  S.  Osher,  “Essentially  Non-Oscillatory 
Shock- Capturing  Schemes  of  Arbitrarily-High  Accuracy,”  AIAA  Paper  86-0339, 
January  1986. 

[4]  S.  R.  Chakravarthy,  “Some  Aspects  of  Essentially  Nonoscillatory  (ENO)  Formu¬ 
lations  for  the  Euler 

Equations,”  NASA  CR-4285,  May  1990. 

[5]  J.  Casper,  “Finite- Volume  Application  of  High  Order  ENO  Schemes  to  Two- 
Dimensional  Boundary- Value  Problems,”  AIAA  Paper  91-0631,  January  1991. 

[6]  S.R.  Chakravarthy,  K.-Y.  Szema  and  C.*L.  Chen,  “A  Universe-Series  Code  for 
Inviscid  CFD  with  Space  Shuttle  Applications  Using  Unstructured  Grids,”  AIAA 
Paper  91-3340,  September  1991. 

[7]  T.J.  Barth  and  P.O.  FVederickson,  “Higher  Order  Solution  of  the  Euler  Equations 
on  Unstructured  Grids  Using  Quadratic  Reconstruction,”  AIAA  Paper  90-0013, 
January  1990. 

[8]  A.  Harten  and  S.R.  Chakravarthy,  “Multi-Dimensional  ENO  Schemes  for  General 
Geometries,”  UCLA  Computational  and  Applied  Mathematics  (CAM)  Report 
91-16. 

[9]  P.  L.  Roe,  “Approximate  Riemann  Solvers,  Parameter  Vectors,  and  Difference 
Schemes,”  Journal  of  Computational  Physics ,  Vol.  43, 1981,  pp.  357-372. 

[10]  P.L.  Roe  and  J.  Pike,  “Efficient  Construction  and  Utilization  of  Approximate 
Riemann  Solutions,”  Computing  Methods  in  Applied  Sciences  and  Engineering, 
VI,  Elsevier  Science  Publishers,  INRIA,  1984. 


179 


NWCTP7207 


[11]  P.L.  Roe,  “Some  Contributions  to  the  Modelling  of  Discontinuous  Flows,”  in: 
Large-Scale  Computations  in  Fluid  Mechanics,  eds.  B.E.  Engquist,  S.  Osher  and 
R.C.J.  Somerville,  Lectures  in  Applied  Mathematics ,  Vol.  22,  Part  1,  163-194, 
AMS,  Providence,  19S5. 

[12]  Roe,  P.L.,  “Characteristic-Based  Schemes  for  the  Euler  Equations,”  Annual  Re¬ 
view  of  Fluid  Mechanics,  18\  337-365,  1986. 

[13]  S.  R.  Chakravarthy  and  S.  Osher,  “Computing  with  High-resolu  .  Upwind 
Schemes  for  Hyperbolic  Equations,”  Lectures  in  Applied  Mathematics,  Volume 
£ 2 ,  Proceedings  of  the  1983  Summer  Seminar  on  Large-Scale  Computations  in 
Fluid  Mechanics,  published  by  the  American  Mathematical  Society. 

[14]  S.K.  Godunov,  “A  Finite-Difference  Method  for  the  Numerical  Computation  of 
Discontinuous  Solutions  of  the  Equations  of  Fluid  Dynamics,”  Mat.  Sb.,  Volume 
47,  1959,  357-393. 

[15]  S.  Osher  and  F.  Solomon,  “Upwind  Schemes  for  Hyperbolic  Systems  of  Conser¬ 
vation  Laws,”  Math.  Comp.,  V.  38  (1982),  pp.  339-377. 

[16]  S.  R.  Chakravarthy  and  S.  Osher,  “Numerical  Experiments  with  the  Osher  Up¬ 
wind  Scheme  for  the  Euler  Equations”,  AIAA  Journal ,  Vol.  21,  No.  9,  September 
1983,  pp.  1241-1248. 

[17]  S.  R.  Chakravarthy  and  S.  Osher,  “High  Resolution  Applications  of  the  Osher 
Upwind  Scheme  for  the  Euler  Equations,”  AIAA  Paper  83-1943,  Proceedings 
of  the  AIAA  Sixth  Computational  Fluid  Dynamics  Conference,  Danvers,  Mas¬ 
sachusetts,  July  1983,  pp.  363-372., 

[18]  A.  Harten,  P.  Lax  and  B.  Van  Leer  On  Upstream  Differencing  and  Gudunov- 
Type  Schemes  for  Hyperbolic  Conservation  Laws  SIAM  Review,  Vol.  25,  35-61 
(1983);  also  ICASE  Report  No.  82-5  (March  1982). 

[19]  S.  R.  Chakravarthy,  “Some  New  Approaches  to  Grid  Generation,  Discretization, 
and  Solution  Methods  for  CFD,”  presented  at  the  4-th  International  Symposium 
on  Computational  Fluid  Dynamics  held  at  the  University  of  California,  Davis, 
September  9-12,  1991. 


180 


NWC  TP  7207 


[20]  G.B.  Whitham,  “Linear  and  Nonlinear  Waves  ”,  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  1974,  pp. 
39-40. 


[21]  K.  Y.  Szema,  S.  R.  Chakravarthy,  D.  Pan,  B.  L.  Bihari,  W.  T.  Riba,  V.  M. 
Akdag,  and  H.  S.  Dresser,  “The  Application  of  a  Unified  Marching  Technique 
for  Flow  Over  Complex  3-Dimensional  Configurations  Across  the  Mach  Number 
Range,”  AIAA  Paper  88-0276,  January  1988. 

[22]  S.R.  Chakravarthy,  K.-Y.  Szema,  and  J.W.  Haney,  “Unified  Nose-to-Tail  Com¬ 
putational  Method  for  Hypersonic  Vehicle  Applications,”  AIAA  Paper  88-2564, 
June  1988; 

[23]  S.R.  Chakravarthy  and  the  Computational  Fluid  Dynamics  Department,  “Com¬ 
putational  Aerodynamics  Methodology  for  the  Aerospace  Plane,”  Computing 
Systems  in  Engineering ,  Vol.  1.  Nos  2-4,  pp.  415-435,  1990. 

[24]  D.  Pan  and  S.  Chakravarthy,  “Unified  Formulation  for  Incompressible  Flows,” 
AIAA  Paper  89-0122,  January  1989. 

[25]  D.K.  Ota,  S.R.  Chakravarthy  and  J.C.  Darling,  “An  Equilibrium  Air  Navier- 
Stokes  Code  for  Hypersonic  Flows,”  AIAA  Paper  88-0419,  January  1988. 

[26]  S.  Palaniswamy,  S.R.  Chakravarthy,  and  D.K.  Ota,  “Finite-Rate  Chemistry  for 
USA-Series  Codes:  Formulation  and  Applications,”  AIAA  Paper  89-0200,  Jan¬ 
uary  1989. 

[27]  S.  Palaniswamy,  D.K.  Ota  and  S.R.  Chakravarthy,  “Some  Reacting-Flow  Vali¬ 
dation  Results  for  USA-Series  Codes,”  AIAA  Paper  91-0583,  January  1991. 

[28]  U.C.  GQldberg  and  S.R.  Chakravarthy,  “Prediction  of  Separated  Flows  with  a 
New  Backflow  Turbulence  Model,”  AIAA  Journal ,  Volume  26,  Number  4,  April 
1988,  Pages  405-408. 

[29]  U.C.  Goldberg  and  S.R.  Chakravarthy,  “Separated  Flow  Predictions  Using  a 
Hybrid  k-L/Backflow  Model,”  AIAA  Journal ,  Volume  28,  Number  6,  June  1990, 
Pages  1005-1009. 

[30]  U.  Goldberg  and  D.  Ota,  “A  k-e  Near- Wall  Formulation  for  Separated  Flows,” 
AIAA  Paper  90-1482,  June  1990. 


181 


NWC  TP  7207 


[31]  U.C.  Goldberg,  “Turbulent  Flow  Computations  With  a  Two-Time  Scale  One- 
Equation  Model,”  AIAA  Paper  91-1790,  June  1991. 

[32]  S.  Ramakrishnan  and  U.  Goldberg,  “Versatility  of  an  Algebraic  Backiiow  Tur¬ 
bulence  Model,”  AIAA  Paper  90-1485,  June  1990. 

[33]  C.L.  Chen,  S.  Ramakrishnan,  K.Y.  Szema,  H.S.  Dresser  and  K.  Rajagopal, 
“Multi-Zonal  Navier-Stokes  Solutions  for  the  Multi-Body  Space  Shuttle  Con¬ 
figuration,”  AIAA  Paper  90-0434,  January  1990. 

[34]  C.  L.  Chen  and  S.  R.  Chakravarthy,  “Calculation  of  Unsteady  Rotor-stator  In¬ 
teraction,”  AIAA  Paper  90-1544,  June  1990. 

[35]  C.L.  Chen  and  C.M.  Hung,  “Numerical  Study  of  Juncture  Flows,”  AIAA  Paper 
91-1660,  June  1990. 

[36]  S.  Osher,  private  communication. 

[37]  A.  Harten,  “ENO  Schemes  with  Subcell  Resolution,”  ICASE  Report  87-56, 
NASA  Langley  Research  Center,  August  1987. 

[38]  S.  Osher,  “Riemann  Solvers,  the  Entropy  Condition,  and  Difference  Approxima¬ 
tions,”  SIAM  Journal  on  Numerical  Analysis ,  Vol.  21,  No.  2,  1984,  pp.  217-235. 

[39]  B.  L.  Bihari  and  S.  R.  Chakravarthy,  “Unstructured  Grid  Generation  Using  the 
Distance  Function,”  Proceedings  of  the  Computational  Fluid  Dynamics  Sympo¬ 
sium  on  Aeropropulsion,  held  at  NASA  Lewis  Research  Center,  Cleveland,  Ohio, 
April  24-26,  1990. 

[40]  R.  Lohner,  “Some  Useful  Data  Structures  for  the  Generation  of  Unstructured 
Grids  ,”  Communications  in  Applied  Numerical  Methods,  Vol.  4,  pp.  123-135, 
1988. 

[411  D-  N.  Knuth,  uThc  Art  of  Computer  Programming ,”  Volume  3,  Addison-Wesley, 
Reading,  Massachusetts,  1973. 

[42]  J.  Batina,  “Unsteady  Euler  Algorithm  with  Unstructured  Dynamic  Mesh  for 
Complex-Aircraft  Aerodynamic  Analysis,”  AIAA  Journal ,  Vol.  29,  No.  3,  March 
1991. 


182 


INITIAL  DISTRIBOnQH 


ib  Naval  Air  Systems  Command 

AIR-526  (1)  AIR-54QT  (1) 

AIR-530  (1)  AIR-540TA  (1) 

ATR-S301  (1)  AIR- 540TB  (I) 

ATE-53011D,  Loetos  (1)  AIR-540TD  (1) 

AIR-5302,  Dudberly  (1)  AIR-540TE  (1) 

AIR-53022,  McMahon  (1)  AIR-540TH  (1) 

AIR-53022B1,  Mays  (1)  AIR-5404  (1) 

AIR-540  (1)  PMA-242  (1) 

\  Chief  of  Naval  Operations 
OP- 502 K  (1) 

OP-506F  (I) 

OP-911  (1) 

OP -982  (1) 

ii  Chief  of  Naval  Research,  Arlington 
OCNR-113  (1) 

OCNR-1132  (1) 

0CHR-12  (1) 

0CNR-121  (1) 

0CfJR-20  (i) 

G CNR -21  (1) 

OCNR-213  (l) 

OCNR-22  (1) 

7  Naval  Sea  Systems  Cosasand 
Cheng-T  (1) 

SEA-06D  (1) 

SEA-06U  (1) 

SEA-62  (1) 

SEA-62D31  fl) 

SEA-63D  {lj 
SEA- 662  (1) 

1  Cossaander- in-Chief ,  U.  S.  Pacific  Fleet,  Pearl  Harbor  (Code  325) 
l  Headquarters,  U.  S.  Marine  Corps  (MC-91MW,  Weapons  Branch) 

1  Ccaasander,  Seventh  Fleet 

1  Marina  Corps  Development  Command,  Quantico  (Marine  Corps  Landing  Force  Development 

Center) 

l  Naval  Air  Warfare  Center  Aircraft  Division  Warminster,  Warminster  (Code  604) 

1  Naval  Air  Warfare  Center  Weapons  Division,  Point  Mugu  (Code  2061,  Technical  Library) 
4  Naval  Postgraduate  School,  Monterey 

Aeronautics  Department ,  Coda  AA/HO,  R.  M.  Howard  (1) 

Dean  of  Research  (1) 

Mechanical  Engineering  (1) 

Physics  and  Chemistry  (1) 

1  Naval  Strike  Warfare  Center,  Fallon  (Intelligence  Library) 

1  Naval  Surface  Warfare  Center,  Indian  Head  Division,  Indian  Head  (Code  26) 


U;  Naval  Surface  Warfare  Center,  Dahlgren  Division,  Dahlgren 
C06  (1) 

G07,  F.  Moore  (1) 

CIO  (1)  •  - 

G20  (2) 

G23  -  -  ur  71 — —  - 

Itaag  (1)  ~ 

Hardy  (1) 

Weisel  (1) 

G30  (1) 

G42,  Higdon  (1) 

GAS,  Briggs  (1)  • 

G103  (1) 

K23  (1) 

N12  (1) 

4  Naval  Surface  Warfare  Center,  Dahlgren  Division  Detachment  White  Oak,  Silver  Spring 
G43  (1) 

X204  (1) 

R12  (1) 

RW  (1) 

1  Naval  War  College,  Newport 

1  Naval  Weapons  Evaluation  Facility,  Kirtland  Air  Force  Base 
l  Naval  Weapons  Station,  Yorktovn  (Code  47) 

1  Array  Missile  Command,  Redstone  Arsenal  (AMSMI-RD-ST,  L.  Mixon) 

1  Army  Materiel  Systems  Analysis  Agency,  Aberdeen  Proving  Ground 

1  Harry  Diamond  Development  Center,  Adelphi  (L.  Cox) 

2  Air  Force  Systems  Command,  Andrews  Air  Force  Base 

AFSC/DLCA  (1) 

AFSC/SDT  (1) 

1  Air  Force  Intelligence  Agency,  Bolling  Air  Force  Base  (AFIA/INT,  Maj.  R.  Esav) 

7  Air  Force  Wright  Laboratories,  Armament  Directorate,  Eglin  Air  Force  Base 
WL/ENMS,  H.  Sidhu  (1) 

WL/MNA  (1) 

WL/MNAG,  Dr.  Cloutier  (1) 

WL/MNGA,  L.  Deibler  (1) 

WL/MNMF  (1) 

WL/KNP  (1) 

WL/MNS  (1) 

1  Air  Force  Wright  Laboratories,  Wright -Patters on  Air  Force  Base 

WL/FIMG  (1) 

WL/FIMM  (1) 

L  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency,  Arlington  (Strategic  Technology  Office) 

2  Defense  Technical  Information  Center,  Alexandria 

1  Deputy  Under  Secretary  of  Defense,  Research  and  Advanced  Technology  (Engineering 

Technology) 

1  Under  Secretary  of  Defense  (Office  of  Munitions) 
i  Langley  Research  Center  (NASA),  Hampton,  VA  (J.  M.  Allen) 

1  Boeing  Aerospace  and  Electronics,  Ridgecrest,  CA  (G.  Ebling) 

1  Fiber  Materials,  Incorporated,  Biddeford,  ME  (J.  Hueseman) 

1  Hughes  Aircraft  Company,  Ridgecrest,  CA  (C.  E.  Woodbum) 
i  IIT  Research  Institute,  Qiicago,  IL  (Document  Library,  GACIAC) 

1  Loral  Aeronutronics,  Ridgecrest,  CA  (Peterson) 

1  Raytheon  Company,  Missile  Systems  Division,  Bedford,  MA  (R.  E.  Peterson) 

3  The  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Applied  "Physics  Laboratory,  Laurel,  MD 

E.  F.  Lucero  (1) 

E.  T.  Harley  (1) 

L.  B.  Weckesser  (1) 


